Programming
the OS/2 Kernel

Programming
the OS/2 Kernel

J. Terry Godfrey
President, JTG Associates

PRENTICE HALL
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632

Library of Congress Catalog1ng-1n-Pub11cat1on Data

Godfrey. J. Terry
Program•lng the OS/2 kernel I J. Terry Godfrey.
p.
co.

ISBN 0-13-723776-6
1. OS/2 <Computer operating systen)

I. Title.

CA76.76.063G63 1991
005.4"469--dc20

90-7518
CIP

Editorial/production supervision and
interior design: Kathlee11 Schiaparelli
Cover design: Wa11da Lubelska
Manufacturing buyer: Lori B11lwin!Li11da Behre11s/Patrice Fraccio

© 1991 by Prentice-Hall, Inc.
A Division of Simon & Schuster
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632

The author and publisher of this book have used their best efforts in preparing this book. These efforts
include the development, research, and testing of the theories and programs to determine their
effectiveness. The author and publisher make no warranty of any kind, expressed or implied, with regard
to these programs or the documentation contained in this book. The author and publisher shall not be
liable in any event for incidental or consequential damages in connection with, or arising out of, the
furnishing, performance, or use of these programs.
UNIX is a registered trademark of AT&T (Bell Laboratories).
Apple and Macintosh are registered trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc.
Intel is a registered trademark of Compuview Products, Inc.
Microsoft Window is a trademark and Microsoft is a registered trademark of the Microsoft Corporation.
IBM and IBM PCfXT/AT are registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form or by any means, without
permission in writing from the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
ID 9 8

7 6

5 4 3 2 1

ISBN 0-13-723776-6
Prentice-Hall International (UK) Limited, Lo11do11
Prentice-Hall of Australia Pty. Limited, Syd11ey
Prentice-Hall Canada Inc., Toro11to
Prentice-Hall Hispanoamericana, S.A., Mexico
Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited, New Delhi
Prentice-Hall of Japan, Inc., Tokyo
Simon & Schuster Asia Pte. Ltd., Si11gapore
Editora Prentice-Hall do Brasil, Ltda., Rio de Ja11eiro

To Judy, Ray, Agnes, and Emma

Contents

xi

PREFACE
Part I

Introduction to OS/2

1

1

1

THE OS/2 ENVIRONMENT
1.1

Hardware Considerations
1.1.1
1.1.2
1.1.3

1.2

1.4

The 80286 and 80386 Architecture, 3
Hardware Operation for Protected Mode, 8
Software Operation for Protected Mode, 12

A Brief Look at Operating System/2
1.2.l
1.2.2
1.2.3
1.2.4
1.2.5

1.3

3

14

Protected Mode, 17
AP/ Services, 19
Memory Management, 29
Multitasking, 29
Version 1.0 and 1.1 Differences, 30

The OS/2 Presentation Manager 31
Summary 35
References

36

Problems

37
vii

Contents

viii

Part II

40

Programming OS/2 Using Assembler
2

INTRODUCTORY OS/2 ASSEMBLER
PROGRAMMING

2.1
2.2

40

OS/2 Services: Accessing the API 40
Introductory Assembler Programming 43
2.2.1 The IBM Macro Assembler/2, 43
2.2.2 An Example Program: Printer Control, 45

2.3

Accessing the Video Services 51
2.3.1
2.3.2
2.3.3
2.3.4

2.4
2.5

3

The Display Buffer, 51
Locking the Screen Context, 54
Printing the Graphics Screen under
OS/2, 62
Connecting Line Graphics with OS/2, 74

Software Design 87
Summary 88
References 89
Problems 89

MEMORY MANAGEMENT AND MULTITASKING
WITH ASSEMBLER

3.1
3.2

Memory Management and Multitasking 93
Memory Management Activities 96
3.2.1
3.2.2
3.2.3
3.2.4
3.2.5

3.3

Creating and Accessing Memory Segments, 96
Creating and Accessing a Shared Segment, 105
Changing Segment Size, 115
Creating and Accessing Huge Segments, 119
Suballocating Memory, 125

Multitasking 129
3.3.1 Semaphores, 129
3.3.2 Creating a Thread, 130
3.3.3 Creating Another Process, 140

3.4

Interprocess Communications
3.4.1
3.4.2

3.5

150

Pipes and Queues, 150
Shared Memory Segments, 163

Summary 163
References 164
Problems 164

93

Ix

Contents

Part Ill

Advanced OS/2 Kernel Programming
4

167

OS/2 and C

4.1

Higher Levels of Abstraction
4.1.1
4.1.2
4.1.3

4.2

4.3

171

C Program Architecture and Structure, 171
Accessing the AP/ from C, 173
Graphics Using C and OS/2, 178
Low-Level Access for Printer Graphics, 182

Creating and Accessing Segments, 192
Creating a Thread or Process, 197

Other Programs
4.4.1
4.4.2

4.5

The C Include Files, 168
The Low-Level Nature of the AP/, 169
Comparison of C with Assembler, 170

Memory Management and Multitasking
with C 188
4.3.1
4.3.2

4.4

167

Introductory C Programming with OS/2
4.2.1
4.2.2
4.2.3
4.2.4

5

167

200

A Rotating Tetrahedron, 200
Plotting Dow Jones Activity, 204

Summary

217

References

217

Problems

217

ADDITIONAL OS/2 CONSIDERATIONS

5.1
5.2

Mixed-Language Programming and OS/2

222

Dynamic Linking and Resource Management
5.2.1
5.2.2
5.2.3
5.2.4

5.3

221

226

Using Dynamic Linked Libraries, 227
The Definition File, 227
Creating a DLL, 231
DLL Examples, 232

Optimizing the C Design Process

239

5.3.1

Top-Down Design, Structured Programming, and
Modular Code, 240
5.3.2 Templates, Style, and Form, 246
5.3.3 AP/ Return Values and Error Checking, 250

5.4

Reexamining the Core versus Presentation Manager
API Services 251

5.5

Advanced C Example: A Three-Dimensional Surface 251

Contents

x

5.6

Summary

267

References 267
Problems 268
APPENDICES

270

A

IBM MACRO ASSEMBLER/2

270

B

MICROSOFT C COMPILER VERSION 5.1

293

C FUNCTION DEFINITIONS AND MACROS
USED TO INTERFACE THE AP/

300

D

PROGRAMS USED IN THIS BOOK

310

E

KEYBOARD AND MOUSE KERNEL FUNCTIONS

313

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

317

INDEX

331

Preface

This book has been developed for teaching programming using the IBM Operating
System/2 (OS/2). It is suitable for a one-semester course in OS/2, as an adjunct to
a course in operating system design, or as a vehicle for self-study on OS/2 programming. The emphasis in the book is on programming techniques for an advanced
multitasking microcomputer operating system. Both Macro Assembler/2 and the C
language are supported in the text. The OS/2 Application Programming Interface
(API) services can be understood in either context.
The text addresses the basic OS/2 kernel services: the video (Vio), Disk
Operating System (Dos), keyboard (Kbd), and mouse (Mou) API functions. The
latter service is most useful in a windowed display such as the Presentation Manager, which is omitted from this text. The book concentrates on the OS/2 FullScreen Command Mode, which utilizes the entire display for presentation of a single
program, making no other programs visible. Similarly, input and output under program control is implemented through the standard assembler or C syntax, such as
printf() or scanf(). These operate in Protected Mode as well as Real Mode. Consequently, there is little need to incorporate specific keyboard API services into the
program examples. Keyboard and mouse functions are discussed briefly in Appendix D. Some use is made of the keyboard services, for example, to pause the graphics screen.
The Presentation Manager windowed interface is not developed in this book.
Although this is a rich and complex interface, it is not considered suitable for a onexi

xii

Preface

semester course on OS/2 programming. The services at the level of IBM's OS/2
Standard Edition 1.0 are assumed as sufficient material for such an introductory
course. When object-oriented programming tools become available for the Presentation Manager and the burden for programming this interface is eased, it will be appropriate in a beginning course in OS/2 programming.
During the late 1980s when OS/2 was developed, the principal major competing operating system for advanced microcomputer applications was UNIX. OS/2
follows IBM's earlier microcomputer operating system, Disk Operating System
(DOS), and runs DOS as a subset. UNIX has tended to be used more within the
scientific and engineering community and is generally optimized for larger machines
than the baseline microcomputers developed during this time frame.
What are the advantages afforded by OS/2? OS/2 is predominantly a multitasking operating system capable of extensive memory management. It accomplishes
these activities through hardware intervention based on the Intel 80286 chip set.
(Hardware compatibility exists at the 80386 and 80486 levels.) There are four levels of protection provided (unlike the Motorola 68020 and 68030, for example,
which have two); hence OS/2 can be tailored to handle the multitasking problem.
The protection mechanisms provide coarse-grained through fine-grained memory
management. This allows a detailed dynamic memory allocation at any given time.
If we examine OS/2 in the framework of the near-term evolution of microcomputer systems (1990s), it is apparent that changes in software development and
applications will dictate about an order-of-magnitude increase in software complexity. It is clear that many efforts will give way to multithread and multiprocessor programming. The OS/2 multitasking features make it a good candidate for major
microcomputer applications during the 1990s time frame. Also, the hardware protection mechanisms mentioned above are suited for minimizing operational errors in
such multitasking situations. Hence OS/2 is positioned to become the operating
system of choice for high-end personal computer applications based on the Intel chip
sets.
OS/2 is particularly suited for user-friendly operation and programming. The
API services are readily programmed in a fashion similar to the now-more-familiar
Basic Input Output System (BIOS) interrupt calls. The Presentation Manager represents a large-scale object-oriented interface. It is programmed in an almost identical
manner to the Microsoft Windows Software Development kit (SDK) programming.
OS/2 is moving rapidly toward widespread acceptance as the IBM microcomputer
operating system for the early 1990s, just as DOS was for the 1980s.
This book is intended to teach techniques on how to program in an advanced
multitasking environment. The approaches required for software development reflect
the solutions and compromises that exist in the 80286 hardware and the OS/2 Protected Mode software. The power of OS/2 lies in its potential to run a number of
large-scale applications simultaneously, with asynchronous and synchronous sharing
of data. The use of pipes, queues, and semaphores (as well as shared memory
blocks) ensures that intertask communication minimizes errors and follows wellestablished guidelines.

Preface

xiii

OS/2 is large, but experience has demonstrated a rather elegant superstructure
that combines Microsoft Windows, DOS, multitasking, and memory management.
Even in the scaled-down 80286 environment, OS/2 presents a very user-friendly
interface to the hardware. Finally, all the programming skills developed for the
earlier DOS framework are applicable when writing software for OS/2. IBM and
Microsoft have maintained many philosophical features of DOS while incorporating
the Apple Macintosh-like graphical interface in PM. OS/2 is truly an order-ofmagnitude change in microcomputer operating systems. The potential for large-scale
object-oriented applications is intrinsic to the PM definition.
This, then, is the world of OS/2 as we move through the 1990s. The reader
can expect a programming arena in which multitasking is important. This is a precursor to the parallel processing systems coming toward the end of the decade. At
the same time, implementation of segmented large-scale applications becomes a
reality through interprocess communications and memory management. Thus efficient use of microcomputer resources becomes feasible. Finally, graphical interface
techniques lead to very user-friendly application environments. OS/2 promises to be
at the forefront of microcomputer operating systems because of all these features.
One comment about the style used in this book. The IBM macro calls to the
Application Program Interface (API) are used throughout. This is in keeping with the
trend toward higher-level-language constructs and structured code when developing
assembler programs. It does have the effect of obscuring the stack loadipg during an
API call and assumes that the reader has access to the IBM API macros (i.e., the
IBM Toolkit include files). The trade-off, however, is that fewer lines of program
code need to be understood, and for someone familiar with the calls, the inferences
are clear. This has implications for maintenance as well as debugging.
This text is practically oriented. The examples are somewhat lengthy, by intention and as a real-world case would be. They are intended for the serious student
who is interested in programming under OS/2. The Color Graphics Adapter mode
(CGA) is illustrated because of its relative simplicity and ease of programming.
Also, it is a readily testable feature that can easily be programmed using C or assembler. The book assumes that the student has a basic familarity with C and assembler.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

As is to be expected, a great many people contributed to this book both knowingly
and unknowingly. It is impossible to give credit in all cases; however, a few notable
exceptions are my wife, Judy, who did all the typing and much of the editing;
Marcia Horton, Editor-in-Chief at Prentice Hall, who was always available to answer
questions and provide inputs; Ray and Agnes, my parents, who laid the groundwork
for this book years ago, and Emma, Judy's mother, who provided both of us with
a sense of stability. Thanks to Kathleen Schiaparelli and her staff for their excellent job producing the book.

xiv

Finally, special mention should be made of the help I received on BIX, Byte
Magazine's bulletin board, for those unanswerable questions that plague every
programmer and can be answered only by someone else. Like many other forums,
BIX is an excellent place to go for answers because of the depth and breadth of experience displayed by its membership. Also, the thoughtful comments provided by
Margaret Mooney added a new perspective.

Programming
the OS/2 Kernel

PART I
Introduction to OS/2

l The OS/2 Environment

During the 1980s, IBM developed (in conjunction with Microsoft, Incorporated) the
Disk Operating System (DOS) [1] as a primary operating system for its family of
microcomputers: the IBM PC, XT, XT286, AT, PS/2 Models 25, 30, 50, 60, 70, and
80. These systems were developed using the Intel family of central processor unit
(CPU) chips, including the 8086, 8088, 80286, and 80386 [2-4]. DOS is a singlethread single-user system and hence is capable of executing only one task at any
given time. Intel, however, provided the 80286 and 80386 with architectures that
ensure hardware protection for multiple applications. This prevents code segments
from being mixed during execution of multiple separate tasks. Such multitasking is
the framework required by the advanced applications in existence and slated to
arrive throughout the decade of the 1990s.
Toward the end of the 1980s a clear need developed for an operating system
that was capable of supporting and utilizing these advanced microcomputer hardware
architectures. In response to this need, IBM and Microsoft developed Operating
System/2 (OS/2) as their candidate to run on the Intel 80286-based (and 80386)
machines [5,6]. There are many facets to OS/2. Both IBM and Microsoft have
provided information needed to be able to program in the OS/2 environment through
their Toolkit (IBM) [7] and Software Development Kit (Microsoft) [8]. Initially,
following an early issue by Microsoft in 1987, IBM released OS/2 Standard Edition
Version 1.0 in December 1987. This early version employed the full-screen command prompt mode only, which initially displays a menu followed by a screen with

1

The OS/2 Environment

2

Chap. 1

header. Basically, two modes were allowed: DOS compatibility mode, which runs
from a screen with a typical prompt such as
(C:\>)
and runs DOS programs, and OS/2 Protected Mode, which runs from a screen with
a typical prompt such as
[C:\>]
In the fall of 1988 IBM released Version 1.1 of the Standard Edition, which included the Presentation Manager (PM) [9]. This provided a full Windows-like graphical interface to the user. This graphical interface is very similar to that found
with the Apple Macintosh operating system [10].
In addition to the Standard Editions, IBM and Microsoft have developed an
Extended Edition, which has a local area network (LAN) interface and a database
manager with support for Structured Query Language (SQL). The later editions of
OS/2 (Extended Edition 1.0-10/88 and 1.1-11/88) function in essentially the same
fashion as the Standard Edition; hence we will focus on the Standard Edition and
not address the LAN and database features in this book. Basically, we are interested
in programming highlights rather than specialized application packages.
IBM recommends a minimum of 2 megabytes (MB) of random access memory (RAM) for running Standard Edition 1.0, 3 MB of RAM for Version 1.1, and
3 MB of RAM for the Extended Edition (EE). Also, the EE may completely consume a 20-MB hard disk drive [11]. Most versions of OS/2 come complete with
the CodeView debugger, which is capable of debugging both assembler and C code.
These are the two languages considered in this book. The language support for
OS/2 is extensive with assembler, FORTRAN, BASIC, C, Pascal, and COBOL
compilers existing. As indicated, we will focus on C [12] and assembler [13] for the
OS/2 environment. Although IBM provides a Protected Mode editor with Version
1.1, in the program development for this book, VEDIT PLUS [14] was used as a
full-screen editor run from the DOS compatibility box. This process was quite
smooth and allowed for early development when only Version 1.0 was available.
Context switching between Real (DOS compatibility box) and Protected Mode was
accomplished rather efficiently in the OS/2 implementation. Programming the Presentation Manager graphical interface is very much a Windows-like exercise [15].
With these introductory remarks in mind, where are we going with this book?
The goal is to establish for the reader the capability to write programs in the OS/2
kernel environment. We address code development in assembler (IBM Macro Assembler/2) and C (Microsoft C Compiler Version 5.1).
What is so unusual about OS/2 in relation to conventional Real Mode (Intel
80286 Real Mode) programming? In OS/2 the major achievement is the definition
of API services for access of the Protected Mode multitasking and memory management features. Typically, an entire new class of function calls is added to the usual
assembler or C code. These functions (the API) constitute the system interface and
have syntax (in ASM) like

Sec. 1.1

Hardware Considerations

@DosExit action,

3

result

instead of the normal return instruction, ret, or
@VioScrLock waitf,iostat,viohdl
@VioGetPhysBuf PVBPtrl,viohdl
@VioScrUnLock viohdl

instead of int lOH. Hence it is apparent at a glance that OS/2 function calls tend to
require more parameters (versus register setup) than conventional assembler. They
have the added attribute, however, of being a symbolically elegant interface. By the
latter reference, we mean that the API services appear as a natural extension of
assembler or C code in modular and complete fashion.
OS/2 is a model operating system for illustrating advanced features in a systems software framework. As discussed, it is somewhat RAM intensive, although it
will run comfortably with 2 MB as an installed base. The principal accomplishment
is the segregation of services for operation in the multitasking environment. How
this segregation is accomplished is reflected in the programming techniques used to
write code for OS/2. OS/2 is a good example of how multitasking should be implemented.
1.1 HARDWARE CONSIDERATIONS

OS/2 is written primarily for the architecture of the Intel 80286 (and is compatible
with the 80386) as it exists in Versions 1.0 and 1.1 of the Standard and Extended
Editions. The manner in which the hardware and software coexist depends largely
on the Intel concept of segmented memory and the notion of levels of protection.
We examine these aspects of OS/2 and attempt to correlate the register-level hardware with OS/2 address allocation. It is important to recognize, however, that keeping with the Intel philosophy of downward compatibility, subsequent microprocessors in the 8086 family run code intended for the earlier chip sets. Hence the 80386
architecture, although more advanced than the 80286, will support 80286 Protected
Mode software. This means that OS/2 runs on 80386 machines as well.
1.1.1 The 80286 and 80386 Architecture
It is worthwhile examining the Intel 80286 (and 80386) architecture at this point
because this implementation serves as the basis for development of programs such
as OS/2. Once we have touched on this hardware foundation, we can forever assume
that a starting point exists from which to explore the features of 80286 systems
software.
Intel started the 8086 family of microprocessors with initial entries that have
16-bit addressing. This includes the 8086, 8088, and 80286 chips. The 80386 has

The OS/2 Environment

4

Chap. 1

32-bit addressing and represents a major step forward, in keeping with the increased
speed of these integrated circuits. What is the major limitation of the 16-bit architecture? In a physical sense (based on the actual wiring of circuits and memory) 16
bits provides only 216 or 65,536 possible individual references. This is the usual 64K
segment. Recognizing that this constituted a very limited memory capability, Intel
expanded the addressing concept to allow for multiple segments by providing a set
of segment registers used to hold segment addresses. (This was in addition to the
16-bit instruction pointer that held an offset into the code segment, for example.)
When IBM implemented the Real Mode operating system DOS, a 1-MB address
limit was built into the architecture which was based on a 20-bit address. Addressing was accomplished by shifting the segment address left 4 bits, appending a zero
(hexadecimal) to the segment address, and adding the offset to get the five-digit
hexadecimal physical address. For example, assuming a segment address lOAF and
an offset FOFF this physical address is
lOAFO
FOFF

(segment address)
(offset address)

lFBEF

(physical address)

where the usual notation would be lOAF:FOFF. What are the register structures used
to support this addressing scheme? In the 8086 and 8088 the following registers
exist:
Data
AX

the Accumulator: This register can be used for general programming
storage.

BX

the Base Register: This register is frequently used to hold address values when accessing memory.

ex

the Count Register: During loop operations this register holds the
count index.

DX

the Data Register: This register is used for general storage.

Segment

cs

the Code Segment Register: This register points to the beginning of
the code segment block.

DS

the Data Segment Register: This register points to the beginning of
the data segment block.

SS

the Stack Segment Register: This register points to the beginning of
the stack segment block.
the Extra Segment Register: This register points to the beginning of
the extra segment block.

ES

Sec. 1.1

Hardware Considerations

5

Pointer

SP
BP

the Stack Pointer: This register holds offset values for the stack.
the Base Pointer: This register holds offset values into the data segments.

SI

the Source Index: This register holds an index offset in memory and
frequently references the instruction source.
the Destination Index: This register holds an index offset in memory
and frequently references the instruction destination.

Index

DI

Added to these 12 registers are the instruction pointer (IP) and flags registers, yielding a total of 14 16-bit registers for the 8088 and 8086.
The 80286 enhances this register set with the addition of five registers:
GDTR
IDTR
LDTR
TR
MSW

the Global Descriptor Table Register: This register points to system
resource segments.
the Interrupt Descriptor Table Register: This register points to interrupt service routine segments.
the Local Descriptor Table Register: This register points to the
active local program code segment.
Task Register: This register holds the code segment address for the
current task.
the Machine Status Word Register: This register sets up the processing for real or Protected Mode.

These Protected Mode registers plus some others are used by the operating system
to provide proper address allocation during execution of an active Protected Mode
task.
Figure 1.1 illustrates a typical 80286 central processor unit (CPU) environment.
Here the parallel external bus structure is apparent. The 80286 control of both the
private and public system buses is via bus controllers (typically, an Intel 82288 and
82289 combination). In the IBM AT and PS/2 Model 50 and 60 such a bus structure exists with a representative architecture as depicted in Figure 1.2. Both these
figures are similar and illustrate the parallel bus structure typical of 80286 systems.
The private system bus contains localized private input/output (110) processing and
buffering such as RS-232C adapters and video adapters, which constitute external
physical entities. These are frequently accessed using direct memory access (DMA)
controllers. The 8259A programmable interrupt controller (PIC) interfaces external
hardware interrupts to the CPU. Both the private and public system buses have a
three-part architecture: a control, address, and data bus subset. Control bus interfaces
are handled by an 82288 bus controller with associated address decode logic (this is

The OS/2 Environment

6

Chap. 1

typically implemented using LS138 decoder/demultiplexers) [16,17]. The address
IJO is handled using latches, which hold and strobe address data onto the system
buses in response to enable signals. Finally, data is placed on the data bus using
transceivers (typically, the LS245 transceiver).
PUBLIC SYSTEM BUS

PRIVATE SYSTEM BUS

PRIVATE
MEMORY

PRIVATEl/O
CONTROLLER

PROCESSING
MODULE

BUS
CONTROLLER

BUS
CONTROLLER

80286

SYSTEM
MEMORY

SYSTEM l/O
CONTROLLER
LOCAL BUS

DIRECT
MEMORY
ACCESS (OMA)
CONTROLLER

PROCESSOR
EXTENSION

PROCESSING
MODULE

Figure 1.1 Representative 80286 system environment illustrating local and system buses.

Figure 1.3 illustrates a representative memory and port allocation of addressing among public and private spaces. For low memory, a 1-MB partition is illustrated from OH to OFFFFFH (here H indicates hexadecimal). This corresponds to the
DOS partition in the IBM microcomputer address space. Local firmware is illustrated
at the top end of the 16-MB physical memory space (OFFFOOOH to OFFFFFFH).
This would be in the OS/2 extended memory area. In the IBM systems, erasable
programmable read-only memory (EPROM) exists between portions of the 640K and
1-MB address area, in what is designated as private system memory in Figure 1.3.
Finally, the bulk of the public system memory resides above 1 MB. In OS/2 imp~ementations, this extended memory exists from 1 MB to 16 MB.
The 80386 uses double-word arithmetic. The eight general registers are 32-bit:
EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX, ESI, EDI, ESP, and EBP. The prefix E indicates that the
familiar 16-bit general registers (AX, BX, ... ) have simply been extended to 32 bits.
In fact, the low-order word of each of these eight registers can be treated as the
equivalent 16-bit register with all the reserved name definitions applied to these 16bit quantities. (The data registers further subdivide into byte-length register halves
AH, AL, BH, BL, ....) Clearly, this implies a downward compatibility for running
16-bit microprocessor (8088, 8086, and 80288) code.
The instruction pointer (EIP) and flags register (EFLAGS) have similar downward compatibility features. Finally, there are six segment registers: CS, DS, ES, SS,
FS, and GS. The last two are new and provide for additional independent data
segment access using overrides. These segment registers are each of word length. In
addition to the registers specified, we have the following new system register types
(plus the memory-management registers specified above):

INTERRUPT LINES (IRO-IRS)

LOCAL BUS
8259A
INTR I PROGRAMMABLE
INTERRUPT
CONTROLLER

82284
CLOCK
GENERATOR
PRIVATE SYSTEM BUS

PUBLIC SYSTEM BUS

80286
CPU

82288 BUS
CONTROLLER

.. .

......

82289 BUS
ARBITER

82288 BUS
CONTROLLER

ADDRESS
DECODE

8283183
LATCHES

8283183
LATCHES

8286/87
TRANSCEIVERS

8286187
TRANSCEIVERS

Figure 1.2 Expanded view of the 80286 bus environment.

8

The OS/2 Environment

Chap. 1

1. Control registers (four): CRO, CRl, CR2, CR3
2. Debug and test registers (eight): DRO, DRl, DR2, DR3, DR4, DRS, DR6,
DR7
MEMORY ADDRESS
SPARE
LOCAL ERROR

FFFFFFH
FFFOOOH
PORT ADDRESS
SPARE

FFFFH

PUBLIC
SYSTEM
MEMORY

PUBLIC

110
100000H

PRIVATE
SYSTEM
MEMORY

t--------11 0 0 H
PRIVATE
1/0

OH

.___ _ _ __.o H

Figure 1.3 Representative memory and port allocation among private and public
address spaces.

What does all this mean in terms of OS/2? Basically, the hardware manipulation of addressing under OS/2, and established by the link/locate operation in response to programmed instruction sequences, must occur so that no segment violations take place in system memory. This is the topic of the next two subsections,
where operation is described for a Protected Mode installation. We will observe that
the 80286 registers are the primary vehicle for ensuring Protected Mode isolation of
tasks.
1.1.2 Hardware Operation for Protected Mode

The main system memory of an 80286 system is organized as a sequence of 8-bit
addressable quantities called bytes. The addressing spans the range 0 to 220 (1 MB)
in Real Address Mode and up to 224 (16 MB) in Protected Mode. In Protected Mode
no direct access to physical memory is allowed. The physical address space, for
example, is controlled by 24 address pins from the 80286 chip itself. This dictates
the 16-MB physical limit. Composition of the address space in Protected Mode,
however, indicates a virtual address capability that is much larger. Basically, the
80286 can access a collection of roughly 16,384 linear subspaces or segments each
with a maximum size of 64 KB. This translates to a virtual memory size of 230
bytes or 1 gigabyte (GB). The virtual memory allocation must map to physical
memory for actual operation, using extended storage where needed. The notion of
segmentation as described here allows programs to execute faster and requires less
space, than does nonsegmented bulk linear addressing.

Sec. 1.1

Hardware Considerations

9

How does this protected virtual address mode manage memory? The segment
selector is used. A particular segment is uniquely referenced by its selector, a 16-bit
address with the following form:
3

Index

2
Tl

0

RPL

Here TI is the table indicator, which references a global space when set or a local
space when zero. The global address space is used for systemwide data and code.
The local address space is for general code and data applications such as user tasks.
The first two selector bits are the requested privilege level (RPL) bits and relate to
protection. This leaves 13 bits, which when coupled with the TI bit allow a segment
address space of 214 segments, as discussed above. We will see the impact of protection shortly, but it will be useful, briefly, to explore these segment descriptors
further. Note that the descriptor table registers point to tables that provide a complete description of the global address space (GDTR), one or more local address
spaces defined dynamically by the LDTR, and an interrupt address space (IDTR).
Within a descriptor table two main classes are recognized: segment descriptors
and special-purpose control descriptors. Figure 1.4 illustrates a descriptor. They provide the physical memory base address, segment size, transfer data, and access data.
The special-purpose control descriptor is very similar. There is a global and several
local descriptor tables as alluded to earlier. (It is these tables that are pointed to
using the GDTR and LDTR.)

ACCESS RIGHTS BYTE

7

07

7

0

INTEL RESERVED

5 Pl DPLJ

1l

3

TPYE

l

Al

6

BASE (23-16)

4

BASE (15-0)

2

SjE

0

15

87

0

ACCESS RIGHTS BYTE
P
-Present
DPL = Descriptor Privilege Level
S
• Segment Descriptor
TYPE - Segment Type

A

-Accessed

Figure 1.4 80286 segment descriptor.

10

The OS/2 Environment

Chap. 1

The 16-bit selector is mapped to a descriptor table entry with its subsequent
24-bit base address. The TI bit determines whether the GOT or a LDT is to be selected. The INDEX field specifies the particular descriptor entry within the chosen
table. To get this descriptor entry the processor simply multiplies the index value by
8 in hardware and adds the result to the descriptor table base address.
The segment address translation registers can be depicted as follows:
48-Bit Hidden Descriptor Cache

Visible

63

48 47

16-bit
selector

Access
rights

0

16 15

40 39

Segment base
address

Segment size

Here the last 16 bits (bits 48-63) comprise the CS, OS, SS, or ES register values.
These bits are the visible portion of the translation register. By loading a segment
selector into one of these registers, the program makes the associated segment one
of its four currently addressable segments. Note that the definition of the segment
base address, the physical address associated with the 16-bit segment selector, must
be correlated with the selector by the system software. It is this correspondence
between the 16-bit selector and the segment base address that permits virtual addressing to function properly. Both of these addresses, along with the access rights
byte and segment size (the translation register contents), permit the correct mapping
of virtual memory to physical memory by OS/2, for example. It is here, then, that
the algorithms developed in the systems software effect the actual mapping of
memory, and the content of this segment address translation register serves as the
basis for this mapping.
Figure 1.5 illustrates the protection levels permitted by the 80286 RPL selection. The two bits provide for four levels of protection. In this figure level 0 is the
most trusted and level 3 the least. Privilege level is a protection attribute assigned
to all segments. Privilege checks are made automatically by the CPU hardware. Programs at level 0 may access data at all other levels, while programs at levels 1-3
may access data only at the same or a less trusted level.
How does OS/2 make use of these levels? Typically, software at level 0 includes services such as memory management, task isolation, intertask communications, and 1/0 resource control. Level 1 is designated system services and provides
functions such as file access scheduling, character 1/0, and data communications.
Level 2 corresponds to reserved space for customized applications such as database
managers, spreadsheets, and word processors, as well as background tasks. Finally,
level 3 contains general-purpose user application of the sort written about in the examples in this book. Privilege applies to tasks and affects three different categories
of descriptors:

Sec. 1.1

11

Hardware Considerations

1. Main memory segments
2. Gates (used to change code segments)
3. Task state segments

LVL-1

LVL=2

LVL-3

Figure 1.5 Protection-level software
allocation and priority, based on level
hierarchy, for the Intel 80286.

Descriptor privilege is assigned when the descriptor is created. We have seen, for
example, how segment descriptors are formed with their access rights byte and RPL
bits controlling protection.
Three kinds of control transfers can occur within a task:
1. Intrasegment transfers
2. Intersegment transfers at the same privilege level
3. Intersegment transfers to different privilege levels
The interlevel transfers must check for access permission and must ensure that a
correct entry address is used. To achieve these control transfers, the gates indicated
earlier must be used.
A gate is a four-word control descriptor used to redirect a control transfer to
a different code segment in the same or a more privileged level or to a different
task. There are four types of gates: call gates, task gates, interrupt gates, and trap
gates. All four gates define a new destination selector (16-bit), and offset (16-bit),
which specifies the physical address to which the transfer is to take place. Call gate
descriptors are established for call and jump instructions in the same manner as a
code segment descriptor. Task gates specify intertask transfers for the initialization

The OS/2 Environment

12

Chap. 1

and establishment of child tasks, information exchange, and synchronization. Interrupt gates permit system-level access of low-level hardware-driven interrupt services,
and trap gates transfer control to system exception-handling services.
Finally, task state segments are a special control segment defined uniquely for
each task. They include the definition of the task address space and execution state.
This segment has a special descriptor whose selector is contained in the Task
Register. Each task state segment contains 22 words, including the current generalpurpose register values and the SS and SP values for each current protection-level
stack (there are four such stacks). The descriptor contains the task descriptor privilege level and the usual segment base and limit values. Hence protection mechanisms are extended to intertask control transfers using task state segment descriptors.
Task switching is accomplished by loading the Task Register with the new task
selector, marking the new task's descriptor type as busy, and setting the Task
Switched bit in the Machine Status Word (MSW). This MSW bit signals that the
context of the processor extension (80287, for example) may not belong to the
current task.
So far we have looked at the 80286 hardware for Protected Mode operational
features. These hardware features allow system software such as OS/2 to develop
strong protection mechanisms in multitasking environments. Without this protection
implementation of the software would necessarily be much more difficult to develop
and software protection mechanisms would be required rather than a reliance on
register bit monitoring. The room for error in such systems software becomes substantially greater as application complexity increases.
1.1.3 Software Operation for Protected Mode

The flag word for the 80286 is

l l I l l I I
15

14

13

NT

IOPL

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

OF

DF

IF

TF

SF

ZF

5

4

AF

3

2

0

PF

CF

where
CF
PF
AF
ZF
SF
TF
IF

Carry Flag (set on high-order bit carry or borrow)
Parity Flag (set if low-order byte contains an even number of l's)
Auxiliary Flag (set on carry or borrow to low-order nibble)
Zero Flag (set if result 0)
Sign Flag (0 if positive or 1 if negative: high-order bit of result)
Trap Flag (single-step mode)
Interrupt Flag (causes CPU to transfer control to a vector location)

Sec. 1.1

13

Hardware Considerations

DF
OF
NT
IOPL

Direction Flag (causes string instructions to auto-decrement when
set)
Overflow Flag (set if result is too large)
Nested Task Flag (when set causes a return to the calling task for
IRET)
IO Privilege Level (specifies current task privilege level)

The Machine Status World (MSW) has the following format:

Used by 80386

3

2

TS

EM

0
MP

PE

where
PE
MP
EM
TS

Protected Enable (places 80286 into protected mode)
Monitor Processor (allows WAIT states to be introduced for the
80287)
Emulate Processor (allows the 80287 to be emulated)
Task Switched (allows test to determine if 80287 context belongs to
current task)

It is clear that modifications to the flag word (IOPL and NT) permit added
software checking for Protected Mode status based on hardware. The MSW provides
a software mechanism for checking coprocessor status with regard to the current
80286 program context. In addition to these changes, a number of instructions have
been added to the basic Real Address Mode set which reflect privileged and trusted
operation. Instructions such as the following fall in this category of enhanced software instruction capability to support Protected Mode.
SMSW
LIDT
LMSW
CLTS
LGDT
LLDT
LTR
SGDT
SLDT
SIDT

Store MSW
Load interrupt descriptor table register
Load MSW
Clear task switch flag
Load global descriptor table register
Load local descriptor table register
Load task register
Store global descriptor table register
Store local descriptor table register
Store interrupt descriptor table register

14

The OS/2 Environment

Chap. 1

These instructions are generally available only to system software. Once an operating system is established (such as OS/2) for the system, privilege-level access must
be regulated within the constraints of this system. The user, for example, cannot
arbitrarily insert code at privilege level 0. During software implementation under
OS/2, privilege-level access is regulated by the OS/2 system software and API service calls for normal application development. This sort of application development
is the type treated in this book.

1.2 A BRIEF LOOK AT OPERATING SYSTEM/2
Figure 1.6 presents a simplified OS/2 architecture. This figure reflects the component
parts needed to define operating systems software completely [18-21] and illustrates
both the multitasking and memory management functions. As with most architectures, Figure 1.6 is a mix between static entities, such as loaders, and dynamic
activities, such as intertask communications. The intent of the figure is to portray
hierarchical relationships [22-25] for OS/2.
Before we examine the major individual features of the IBM OS/2 implementation, it will be useful briefly to discuss Figure 1.6. This architecture attaches equal
importance to the 80286 (or 80386) hardware protection implementation and OS/2
itself. Without the hardware mechanisms OS/2 would be a much bulkier and more
sluggish operating system. Hence the Intel chip architecture deserves a substantial
amount of credit for yielding an optimized multitasking executive. The dominant
mechanism for installing multitask protection is the definition of privilege based on
hardware monitoring and checking. This mechanism is put in place in the software
during system initialization. The loader and kernel act at level 0 to define the
baseline operating system. Device service is handled through the device drivers,
which consist of three parts:

1. An initialization routine
2. A strategy routine
3. An interrupt routine
The initialization routine initializes the device by setting the device registers with
proper data to establish mode of operation, and this routine also establishes any data
structures (buffers and parameter data) needed by the device during operation. The
strategy routine receives 1/0 requests from the kernel and initiates I/0. The Interrupt
Service Routine (ISR) is the only OS/2 program privileged to accept and process
hardware interrupts (signals on IRO-IR7 of the two 8259A PICs in the IBM PC AT,
for example). The device service routines call DevH!p functions in order that the
ISR can access application buffers from the kernel. 1/0 Protection Level checking is
continuously monitored to validate what buffers may be accessed by the drivers.
Other API functions are used to ensure proper physical memory segmentation, for
example, as is the case with screen buffer access.

IBM
System

80286

Hardware
Protection
Implementation

OS/2

_l_

OS/2
lnltallzatlon

Device
Service
And l/O

_L

l

Protected
Loader

IOPL

I

I

Kernel
(LevelO)

Device

Drivers

User
Interface

OS/2
Executive

File
System
Managemant

I

Data
Managemant

Task
Manager

Resident
Process

VIO/
Keyboard

PM
Executive

Permission
And
Protection
Validation

I

I

I

I

l

Extended
File
Management

Scheduler

Primary
Thread

Command
Parser

Message
Processing

l

l

l

l

l

Child
Processes

Standard
Text Display
Interface

Protected
Address
Allocation

Segment
Sharing

Intertask
Communications

I

Task
Termination

Application
Loader

Graphical
Display
Functions

I

-[

l

Mouse
Interface

Application
Loader

[

Current
Task

]

Figure 1.6 IBM OS/2 architecture.
(II

Interface

l

l

....

I
Mouse

16

The 08/2 Environment

Chap. 1

The OS/2 executive is the main processing element of the architecture. This
routine contains the core loop, which is the infinite loop sequence representing the
idle system state and which may only be affected by a hardware interrupt such as
the striking of a key on the keyboard. The executive has four components: file
system management, data management, task management, and data segment definition. All objects in the system represent named entities and are subject to file
management rules. File permission and protection validation is conducted at a relatively high level in software. At a lower level, the protected address allocation
requires privilege-level authority.
Data management is an extension of file system management. This component
of the executive ensures that segmentation violations do not occur because proper
allocation is implemented. It manages extended files (disk and diskette files, for
example). It handles the movement of data in a virtual memory context where the
amount of virtual memory required for data, for example, can exceed the total
available physical memory in the system. (This is also true for other memory types,
such as program memory.) Segment sharing among tasks and other interprocess
communication activities involving the access of data segments are managed by this
component.
The task manager is the primary dynamic activity element during program
execution. We use the terms thread and process assuming some familiarity with
these abstract concepts. Briefly, a thread provides program instructions and data in
an execution environment that consists of registers, stacks, and CPU dynamics.
Threads do not have system resources allocated to them, but may call or access such
resources under the umbrella of a process. Here a process is a collection of threads
and system resources allocated to a program. OS/2 task management includes scheduling with a preemptive time-slicing dispatcher. This type of dispatcher is operated
on a polling model concept where each thread has a fixed period of time during
which it may execute (the time slice) before control is taken away (preempted) and
the next thread rolled in and allowed to execute. The process continues in wraparound fashion, and each time slice executes for an approximately equal length of
time (at a given privilege level), which is dynamically allocated based on the
number of threads active in the system. Task initialization is established by the task
manager at level 0 and involves service calls of the type DosCreateThread or
DosExecPgm.
Intertask communications typically involve semaphores, pipes, and queues.
Also, shared memory segments can be used to pass data among threads and processes. A semaphore is a data structure that OS/2 passes to only one thread at a
time. This provides for a rudimentary serialization when two threads, for example,
need to access a common data area. OS/2 implements two kinds of semaphores: system and RAM semaphores. System semaphores are used for communication between
processes and are implemented by DosCreateSem, for example. RAM semaphores,
on the other hand, are used between threads in a single process.
Pipes are buffer areas created by DosMakePipe and are accessed using pipe

Sec. 1.2

A Brief Look at Operating System/2

17

read and write handles in much the same fashion that conventional file handles are
used to access files. To use a pipe to communicate with another process, the pipe is
first created and then one of its two handles (read or write) is passed to the second
process using a common data structure. In accessing buffers via pipes the data is
treated as a continuous stream. An alternative interprocess communications tool is
the queue generated by the DosCreateQueue service. Here the data is viewed as an
individual collection of finite-length elements that may be separately addressed or
accessed. The major feature of the queue is the variability with which data elements
may be accessed.
Termination of a communication or task is typically initiated by API calls of
the type DosCloseQueue, DosCloseSem, or DosExit. Finally, the task manager is
responsible for maintaining all thread parameters on the local thread stack during
roll-out by the dispatcher. When a task has been preempted it must maintain pointers to entry points in the code and associated data segments that reflect its current
execution position. This is what the task state segment contains, and the task
manager is responsible for establishing and maintaining this segment. Data segments
must, of course, be defined at the proper privilege level and accessed only with the
proper privilege authority. This is also a function of the OS/2 executive.
The user interface represents OS/2s interaction with the outside world. Two
visual displays are possible: the VIO or full-screen command mode and the Pres~ntation Manager (PM), a windowed mode where visual data from multiple tasks can
be presented. The VIO has a familiar DOS-like screen. The PM is a dynamic display environment capable of simultaneously illustrating multiple program execution
through overlapping windows of the type found in the Microsoft Windows program
and similar to the Apple Macintosh display. The PM coordinates activity internally
by exchanging messages among tasks and the PM executive. A preferred interface
technique is the mouse, which moves a cursor around the screen. When the cursor
is placed on a system or menu operation and the mouse single- or double-clicked,
the command is executed. This requires an extensive command interpreter based on
messages returned to the PM executive.
1.2.1 Protected Mode
In the discussion so far we have alluded to the API service routines. These are the
topics of the next section, but it must be emphasized that they are a consequence of
the Protected Mode implementation. Before examining the API, however, it is useful
to look briefly at some of the Protected Mode operational considerations.
When Real Address Mode is initialized and executes, the boot record causes
the code segment register eventually to load with FOOO and the instruction pointer
to load with FFFO. This address points to a private memory segment that provides
64K bytes of code space for initialization code without changing CS. During initialization of Protected Mode, several registers must also be initialized: Both the GDT
and IDT base registers must point to a valid global descriptor table and interrupt

18

The OS/2 Environment

Chap. 1

descriptor table, respectively. The 80286 next executes the LMSW instruction to set
the protected enable (PE) bit and must follow this with an intrasegment JMP
(unconditional jump) instruction to clear its CPU instruction queue of instructions
decoded in Real Address Mode. To initialize the 80286 registers for the initial
Protected Mode state the JMP instruction executes with a selector referring to the
initial task state segment address used in the system. This loads the task register,
LDTR, segment registers, and remaining general registers with the initial Protected
Mode parameter data. The TR should point at a valid task state segment.
We have seen a general description of Protected Mode features. The 80286
mechanisms to protect critical instructions (that affect CPU execution states such as
HLT, halt) have three attributes:

1. They involve restricted usage of segments, with the only segments available
for use by applications defined by the LDT and GDT.
2. They involve restricted access to segments via privilege.
3. They include privileged instructions or operations that may be executed only
at privilege levels determined by the current privilege level and 1/0 Privilege
Level (IOPL).
These mechanisms yield checks that are performed for all instructions and include
segment load checks, operand reference checks, and privileged instruction checks.
Operand reference errors would include writes to the code segment or segment limit
exceeded, for example. Finally, an example of a privileged instruction exception or
error would be the execution of an IN or OUT (port input or output instruction,
respectively) instruction when the current protection level for the executing task is
less trusted than the required IOPL.
Four types of control transfer can occur when a selector is loaded into CS:
intersegment with the same privilege level, intersegment to the same or higher-privilege-level interrupt, intersegment to a lower privilege level, and a task switch. We
have already briefly considered these transfers, but what are the privilege rules
associated with these transfers? The rules are as follows:
1. JMP or CALL direct to a code segment can only be to a segment with descriptor privilege level greater than or equal in privilege to the current privilege level.
2. Interrupts within a task or calls that may change privilege levels can only
transfer control through a gate at the same or a less privileged level (than the
current privilege level) to a code segment at the same or more privileged level
(than the current privilege level).
3. Return instructions that do not switch tasks can only return to a code segment
with the same or less trust.
4. A task switch can be performed by a call, jump, or interrupt that references a
task gate or task state segment of the same or less trust.

Sec. 1.2

A Brief Look at Operating System/2

19

Any violation of these descriptor privilege-level rules will result in exception 13,
indicating a segmentation violation.
A task has a current privilege level (CPL) defined by the lower two bits of the
CS register (in the selector), as we have seen. CPL can change only when CS
changes, using a control transfer through gate descriptors to a new code segment.
Tasks begin executing at the CPL specified by the task switch's resulting code
segment. Tasks executing at level 0 can access all data segments defined in both the
GDT and the task's LDT. Any control transfer that changes CPL within a task
requires a change of stacks. Initial values of SS and SP for privilege levels 0, 1, and
2 are maintained in the task state segment. The values for level 3 are defined by the application and affect such transfers as establishing a new thread using
DosCreateThread.
These brief remarks about the Protected Mode are intended to put the hardware implementation in perspective. We have seen how privilege-level monitoring,
for example, serves as a basis for segment access during execution. The 80286
hardware features include rules and rule checking to maintain privilege integrity, and
this preserves proper task operation in a multitasking environment.
Generally speaking, data such as the GDT, initial task state segment, and
system services will be located in erasable programmable read-only memory as part
of the system build. These are all loaded during the bootstrap process and precede
the actual OS/2 executive load and initialization. The foregoing discussion presents
the salient 80286 features applicable to a consideration of how OS/2 avoids segment
violations. This is the cornerstone for multitasking and memory management. The
80286 Protected Mode attributes are summarized briefly in Table 1.1.

1.2.2 API Services
The Application Program Interface services have been mentioned a number of times
so far in the discussion, and Table 1.2 lists these functions (for Version 1.0), indicating whether or not they are conventional API (all the OS/2 services comprise the
API, or a subset of the API, the DOS family API, which corresponds roughly to the
BIOS and DOS services and runs under the DOS compatibility box as well as the
Protected Mode).
The API services are based on the CALL instruction rather than the INT
instruction. These API functions act in similar fashion to conventional higher-levellanguage (HLL) routines with their individual stacks and local parameter spaces. For
OS/2 programs written in assembly language, the API service request can be cumbersome. On the other hand, these OS/2 service implementations add an elegance to
the resulting code that with just a few exceptions enhances modular development. In
a higher-level-language context the API services improve modularity and structure.
We will see examples of the use of these services in an assembly language and C
context throughout the remainder of this book. Basically, however, the API is most
desirable in a HLL environment.

20

The 08/2 Environment

TABLE 1.1

Chap. 1

80286 PROTECTED MODE FEATURES

Feature

Discussion

1/0 protection

To help manage 1/0 activities such as setting/clearing interrupts
and port read/writes, the 80286 implements an 1/0 Protection
Level (IOPL). This flag defines the minimum protection level
at which a program must execute to perform 1/0. This
provides operating system control of the hardware.
The 80286 provides for four levels of protection:
1. PLO (Privilege 0): Most trusted; can access data at levels
0, 1, 2, and 3.
2. PLl (Privilege 1): Can access data at levels 1, 2, and 3.
3. PL2 (Privilege 2): Can access data at levels 2 and 3.
4. PL3 (Privilege 3): Least trusted; can access data at 3.
Through use of LDTs each application program is allocated a
private memory space. No other tasks are allowed to enter or
use a given task's LDT area. Any common memory elements
must be shared using the GDT.
These attributes are specified in the descriptor table access byte.
They include such features as read/write access and descriptor
privilege level as well as a flag to indicate execution only
(versus addresses associated with variable allocation).

Privilege levels

Address protection

Memory attributes

TABLE 1.2

APPLICATION PROGRAMMING INTERFACE ROUTINES

Name

API

DosCreateThread
DosCWait
DosEnterCritSec
DosExecPgm

x
x
x

FAPI

Description

Tasking

x

DosExit
DosExitCritSec
DosExitList
DosGetlnfoSeg

x
x

DosGetPrty

x

DosKilJProcess
DosPtrace
DosSetPrty

x
x
x

x

x

Creates asynchronous thread
Places current thread in wait state
Disables thread switching
Allows another program to
execute a child
Issued at completion of execution
Reenables thread switching
Maintains an exit list for routines
Returns the address of a data
segment
Gets the priority of the current
thread
Terminates a process
Interfaces to kernel for debugging
Changes priority of child process

Asynchronous Notification
DosHoldSignal

x

Changes signal processing

Sec. 1.2

A Brief Look at Operating System/2

TABLE 1.2

21

(Continued)

Name

API

DosSetSigHandler
Interprocess Communication
DosCloseQueue
DosCloseSem
DosCreateQueue
DosCreateSem
DosF!agProcess

x
x
x
x
x

DosMakePipe
DosMaxSemWait
DosOpenQueue
DosOpenSem
DosPeekQueue
DosPurgeQueue
DosQueryQueue
DosReadQueue
DosResumeThread
DosSemClear
DosSemRequest
DosSemSet
DosSemSetWait
DosSemWait
DosSuspendThread

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Dos WriteQueue

x

Timer
DosGetDateTime
DosSetDateTime
DosSleep
Memory Management
DosAllocSeg
DosAllocShrSeg
DosAllocHuge
DosCreateCSAlias
DosFreeSeg
DosGetHugeShift

FAPI

Description

x

Notifies OS/2 of a handler for a
signal

Closes a queue
Closes a semaphore
Creates a queue
Creates a semaphore
Allows a process to set an
"event" flag
Creates a pipe
Blocks until semaphore clears
Opens queue
Opens semaphore
Examines element in queue
Purges a queue
Finds the size of a queue
Reads an element from a queue
Restarts a thread
Clears a semaphore
Obtains a semaphore
Sets a semaphore
Blocks a thread until a semaphore
Waits for a semaphore to clear
Temporarily suspends thread
execution
Adds an element to a queue

x
x
x

Gets the current date/time
Sets the date/time
Suspends the current thread

x

Allocates a segment of memory
Allocates a shared segment
Allocates multiple memory
segments
Creates a code segment descriptor
Reallocates a memory segment
Returns a shift count for deriving
selectors

x
x

x
x
x

22

The OS/2 Environment

TABLE 1.2

Chap. 1

(Continued)

Name

API

DosGetShrSeg
DosGetSeg
DosGiveSeg

x
x
x

DosLockSeg
DosMemAvail
DosReallocHuge
DosReallocSeg
DosSubAlloc

x
x

FAPI

x
x
x

DosSubFree

x

DosSubSet
DosUnlockSeg

x

Dynamic Linking
DosFreeModule
DosGetModHandle

x
x

DosGetModName

x

DosGetProcAddr
DosLoadModule
DosGetMachineMode
BadDynLink

x
x

x

x
x

Device Monitors
DosMonClose

x

DosMonOpen
DosMonRead
DosMonReg
DosMonWrite

x
x
x
x

Session Management
DosStartSession
DosStopSession
DosSelectSession

x
x
x

DosSetSession

x

Description
Accesses shared memory
Accesses shared memory
Yields shared access to another
process
Locks a discardable segment
Returns size of largest free block
Changes huge memory size
Changes segment size
Allocates from a previous
allocated segment
Frees from a previous allocated
memory
Initializes a segment
Unlocks a discardable segment

Frees a dynamic link module
Returns handle for dynamic link
module
Returns pathname for dynamic
link module
Returns FAR procedure address
Loads a dynamic link module
Returns current CPU mode
Error on dynamic link

Terminates character device
monitoring
Accesses a character device
Moves data
Establishes I/0 buffer
Writes to the monitor's buffer

Starts a session
Stops .a session
Allows a parent to switch to a
child
Sets child session status

Sec. 1.2

23

A Brief Look at Operating System/2

TABLE 1.2

(Continued)

Name

Device 1/0 Services
DosBeep
DosCLIAccess

API

FAPI

Description

x

Beeps speaker
Requests privilege for enabling/
disabling interrupts
Gets information about attached
devices
Sets up control functions for a
specified device
Returns current process ID
Specifies the code page and foot
to make active
Indicates the spool file is closed
Allows initialization of the code
page and font
Queries the active code page and
font
Indicates validity for the
specified code page and font
Obtains disk information
Requests or releases port 1/0
privilege
Sends a Ctl/c or Ctl-Break to
process
Deregisters a keyboard
Reads a character
Ends the existing logical keyboard
Clears the keyboard buffer
Frees the logical to physical
keyboard bond
Allows access to the current
code page
Binds the logical to physical
keyboard
Gets the state of the keyboard
Creates a new logical keyboard
Returns the last character without
clearing the keyboard buffer
Registers a keyboard
Sets the code page
Installs a code page and calling
handle

x

DosDevConfig

x

DosDevIOCtL

x
x

DosGetPID
DosPFSActivate

x

DosPFSCloseUser
DosPFSinit

x
x

DosPFSQueryAct

x

DosPFSVerify Font

x

DosPhysicalDisk
DosPortAccess

x

DosSendSignal

x

KbdDeRegister
KbdCharln
KbdClose
KbdFlushBuffer
KbdFreeFocus

x

KbdGetCp

x

KbdGetFocus

x

x

x
x

x
x

x
x

KbdGetStatus
KbdOpen
KbdPeek
KbdRegister
KbdSetCp
KbdSetCustXt

x
x
x
x

24

The OS/2 Environment

TABLE 1.2

Chap. 1

(Continued)

Name

KbdSetFgnd

API

FAPI

x
x
x

KbdSetStatus
KbdStringln
KbdSynch

x

KbdXlate
Mou Close
MouDeRegister
MouDrawPtr

x
x
x
x

MouFlushQue
MouGetDevStatus

x
x

MouGetEventMask
MouGetNumButtons

x
x

MouGetNumMickeys

x

MouGetNumQueEl

x

MouGetPtrPos

x

MouGetPtrShape
MouGetScaleFact

x
x

MoulnitReal
Mou Open
MouReadEventQue

x
x
x

MouRegister
MouRemoves Ptr

x
x

MouSetDevStatus
MouSetEventMask
MouSetPtrPos

x
x
x

MouSetPtrShape
MouSetScaleFact

x
x

MouSynch
VioDeRegister
VioEndPopUp

x
x
x

Description

Raises the priority of the
foreground keyboard's thread
Sets the keyboard characteristics
Reads a character string
Synchronizes access for a
keyboard to device driver
Translates scan codes to ASCII
Closes the mouse driver
Deregisters a mouse device
Opens a mouse pointer image to
the mouse
Empties the mouse queue
Returns status flags for the mouse
driver
Returns event mask for mouse
Returns number mouse buttons
supported
Returns number of mouse
movement units per centimeter
Returns status for mouse device
drive event queue
Gets row and column position of
mouse
Gets the pointer shape
Gets the scaling factors for the
mouse
Initializes the DOS mode mouse
Opens the mouse device
Reads an event from the mouse
device event queue
Registers a mouse
Clears a pointer area from mouse
use
Sets mouse status
Assigns a new event mask
Resets the row and column
position for the mouse
Sets the mouse shape
Assigns the mouse a new pair of
scaling factors
Synchronizes the mouse
Deregisters a video subsystem
Closes a temporary screen

Sec. 1.2

A Brief Look at Operating System/2

TABLE 1.2

(Continued)

Name

API

VioGetAnsi

x

VioGetBuf

x

VioGetCp
VioGetConfig
VioGetCurPos
VioGetCurType
VioGetFont
VioGetMode
VioGetPhysBuf

x

VioGetState
VioModeUndo
VioModeWait
VioPopUp
VioPrtSc
VioPrtScToggle
VioReadCellStr

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

VioReadCharStr
VioRegister

x

VioSaveRedrawUndo
VioSavRedrawWait

x
x

VioScrLock
VioScrollDn
VioScrollUp
VioScrollLf
VioScrollRt
VioScrUnLock
VioSetAnsi
VioSetCp
VioSetCurPos
VioSetCurType
VioSetFont
VioSetMode
VioSetState

PAPI

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

25

Description

Returns the current ANSI
ON/OFF state
Returns the address of the logical
video buffer
Allows a query of the code page
Returns the display configuration
Returns the cursor position
Returns the cursor type
Returns font
Returns display mode
Gets addressability to physical
display buffer
Gets display state
Changes mode
Allows notification when display
must be restored
Allocates a temporary screen
Copies the screen to printer
Called when Ctrd-PrtSc is entered
Reads character-attribute pairs
(cells) from screen
Reads a character string from the
display
Registers an Alternate Video
subsystem
Cancels a VioSavRedrawWait
Notifies a redraw must be
performed
Locks the physical display
Scrolls down
Scrolls up
Scrolls left
Scrolls right
Unlocks the physical display
Activates or deactivates ANSI
support
Sets the code page
Sets the cursor position
Sets the cursor type
Downloads a display font
Sets display mode
Sets the display state

The OS/2 Environment

26
TABLE 1.2

Chap. 1

(Continued)

Name

API

VioShowBuf

x

FAPI

VioWrtCellStr

x

VioWrtCharStr

x

Vio WrtCharStrAtt

x

VioWrtNAtt

x

VioWrtNCell

x

VioWrtNChar

x

VioWrtTTY

x

Description

Updates the physical display with
the logical
Writes a string of characterattribute cells to display
Writes a character string to the
display
Writes a repeated attribute string
to the display
Writes an attribute M times to
the display
Writes a cell M times to the
display
Writes a character M times to
the display
Writes a character string to the
display

File 110

DosBufReset

x

DosChDir
DosChgFilePtr
DosClose
DosDelete
DosDupHandle

x
x
x

DosFileLocks

x

DosFindClose

x

DosFindFirst

x

DosFindNext

x

DosMkDir
DosMove
DosNewSize
DosOpen
DosQCurDir

x
x
x
x
x

DosQCurDisk
DosQFHandState

x

x
x

x

Flushes a requesting process
cache buffer
Defines the current directory
Moves the read/write pointer
Closes a file handle
Removes a directory entry
Returns a new file handle for an
open file
Locks and unlocks a range in an
open file
Closes the association between
directory handles and search
functions
Finds the first set of names that
match a directory specification
Locates the next set of matching
directory entries
Creates specifies directory
Moves a file
Changes a file size
Opens a file
Gets full path name for current
directory
Gets the current default drive
Queries the state of the specified
files

Sec. 1.2

A Brief Look at Operating System/2

TABLE 1.2

(Continued)

Name

API

27

FAPI

Description

DosQFilelnfo

x

DosQFslnfo

x

DosQHandType

x

DosQVerify

x

Returns information for a specific
file
Queries information from a file
system device
Determines whether a handle
references file/device
Returns the value of the verify
flag
Reads from a file to a buffer
Transfers from a file to a buffer,
asynchronously
Removes a subdirectory
Searches an environment for a
value
Searches a path for a filename
Specifies the default drive
Sets the state of a file
Specifies information for a file
Changes the attributes of a file
Specifies information for a file
system device
Defines a maximum number of
file handles
Sets a verify switch
Transfers from a buffer to a file
Transfers from a buffer to a file,
asynchronously

x

DosRead
DosReadAsync

x

DosRunDir
DosScanEnv

x

x

DosSearchPath
DosSelectDisk
DosSetFHandState
DosSetFilelnfo
DosSetFileMode
DosSetFslnfo

x

DosSetMaxFH

x

DosSetVerify
Dos Write
DosWriteAsync

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

Errors and Exceptions
DosErrClass
DosError

x
x

DosSetVac

x

Messages
DosGetMessage

x

DoslnsMessage
DosPutMessage

x
x

Trace/Program Startup
DosGetEnv

x

Returns error code options
Allows the disabling or user
notification on errors
Allows address registration for
machine exceptions

Retrieves a message from a
message file
Inserts text into message body
Outputs a message

Returns a pointer to the
environment string

The OS/2 Environment

28
TABLE 1.2

Chap. 1

(Concluded)

Name

API

FAPI

Description

x

Returns the OS/2 version number

x
x

Gets the current code page
Sets the current code page
Sets the current code page

DosCaseMap

x

DosGetCollate
DosGetCtry Info
DosGetDBCSEv

x
x
x

Case maps country codes to a
binary string
Obtains country information
Obtains country information
Obtains country environment
vector

DosGetVersion
Code Page Support

DosGetCp
DosSetCp
DosSetProcCp

x

Country Support

Most microcomputer system software involves intersegment references between
segments contained in the program file obtained from the linker, the .EXE file in
DOS. This reference mechanism is referred to as static linking because it is implemented prior to run-time loading. Loading merely brings the segments into memory and modifies fix-up points to reflect the correct intersegment references.
OS/2 allows the loader (not the linker) to reference segments included in special dynamic-link libraries (DLL). The entire APT is based on DLL programming.
How does a dynamic-link reference function? Basically, any program can reference
DLL routines by indicating that they are externally defined (using the EXTRN
pseudo-op, for example, in an assembler program). At link time the system matches
external references with other object modules (.OBJ files) and libraries (.LIB files)
specified. Since the DLL routines are an .EXE file and suitable for run-time loading, they do not fall in the .OBJ or .LIB category. A new type of library file is
required, the dynamic-link definition library file. This file simply satisfies the external reference by indicating to the loader the location of the DLL routine involved.
At run time the loader then adds the DLL code from storage to the executable
module.
The API call interface employs dynamic linking. The major advantages to this
approach are that:
1. The API code can easily be modified at the system level
2. The API call can be satisfied with in-line code instead of the DLL code if
desired by proper loading
3. The API can include some services not essential to kernel-level privilege, and
these services can be implemented with less protection
4. The API call is direct, not via vector table routing
5. The API library can easily be expanded

Sec. 1.2

A Brief Look at Operating System/2

29

In Chapter 2 we begin to develop the programming techniques needed to access
properly the services outlined in Table 1.2.
1.2.3 Memory Management

OS/2 provides a significant memory management capability by using the hardware
features of the 80286, together with its system architecture. OS/2 provides the capability to move segments around and free memory in response to DLL requirements.
Also, using the P bit of the descriptor, OS/2 can determine when a referenced
segment is needed and dynamically roll these segments in or out of memory from
extended storage, in response to program execution. Such segment swapping is the
basis for allowing large-scale access to the virtual address space in a given physical memory implementation. Provision exists to:

1. Create or close new segments
2. Create or close huge segments (greater than 64 KB)
3. Suballocate segments
This corresponds to the demand loading philosophy, which OS/2 supports, and
allows dynamic reallocation and subdivision of memory in response to changing
requirements.
1.2.4 Multitasking

Just as memory management has been addressed earlier in the chapter, multitasking
has been covered in Sections 1.1 and 1.2.1. We have mentioned the notion of
threads (a dispatchable unit), processes (a collection of threads and system resources), and a session is a collection of processes run in a virtual context. Under
OS/2, for example, a given element of program code comprises a thread's executable
context. This may run as multiple instances in which multiple copies of the thread
are executed as individual tasks, each task running the same code. Based on this
interpretation the meaning of an instance is clear: an executing entity dynamically
different from all others.
The reentrant nature of OS/2 threads requires that if multiple threads access the
same data block, the threads must synchronize access to this data. This synchronization can be accomplished using a number of OS/2 features already discussed
(semaphores, queues, pipes, flags, and shared memory). Interprocess communication
requires the use of these facilities, and threads desiring to access such common data
blocks must serialize their access. In general, when no common access between
processes is required, OS/2 will asynchronously execute the processes in a multitasking situation.
A simple example of process synchronization is presented in Chapter 2, where
a common data area (shared segment) is established using DosAllocShrSeg and the
first few bytes are used to establish a handshake. The creating process sets the flag
byte to zero and turns on the child process, which also has access to the segment.
Once the child process completes its generation of data (to be used by the parent),
it sets the flag to 1. The parent, sensing a 1, then accesses the segment.

30

The OS/2 Environment

Chap. 1

Semaphores, pipes, and queues have much the same functional behavior except that they represent tools specifically designed for interprocess exchanges. These
OS/2 objects represent a formal extension of interprocess communications (compared
with the shared memory flag above, for example). DosSetSigHandler and
DosFlagProcess are examples of formal flag implementation services. We examine
those resources in later chapters.
Processes are created with the API service DosExecPgrm, as we shall see in
Chapter 2. They are hierarchical in that the creating process serves as the parent,
with the created process the child. The API DosKillProcess can be used to terminate
a child process. At creation a process can be established asynchronously, during
which the parent continues to execute in normal time-slice fashion, or synchronously, where the parent is suspended until the child completes execution. When a
thread is created it assumes the priority level of its creator. Using DosSleep a thread
may stop execution for a fixed period. During this period the thread is not allowed
to access system resources.
We have considered dynamic linking, in which a DLL is created and an associated definition file containing pointers to the DLL entries. At run time the definition file has already been linked with the main calling routine, so the loader simply
brings the DLL into memory and completes its entry-point fix up. A second type of
dynamic linking exists called run-time dynamic linking. In the latter procedure the
API DosLoadModule can actually be used to load a DLL after execution begins.
The difference between run-time dynamic linking and load-time dynamic linking is
that loading the DLLs and entry point fix-ups can occur after execution begins in
the former if needed, whereas they must occur during loading in the latter.
Finally, we look briefly at input and output (1/0) in the privileged multitasking environment. 1/0 occurs from level 2, whereas applications execute from
level 3; hence OS/2 must build a call gate for access to segments that accomplish
1/0- 1/0-protected segments (IOPS). Such segments are created by the loader, and
typically, API calls such as DosOpen or DosClose establish generation of an IOPS
(see Table 1.2).

1.2.5 Version 1.0 and 1.1 Differences
Earlier we saw the API functions described (Table 1.2). In the IBM OS/2 Standard
Edition 1.0 these functions comprised the bulk of the services afforded by OS/2 and
were intended for use by programmers desiring to access these services. The Toolkit
routines (reference 7) provide a collection of include files (for both C and assembler) that make use of the API services relatively easy.
With the development of Standard Edition 1.1 (aside from some relatively
minor enhancements) the addition of the Presentation Manager (PM) graphical interface, and its associated 300 plus function library, is the major improvement over
Version 1.0. Essentially, OS/2 under Version 1.0 employs a DOS-like full-screen
command mode for the user interface. This display mode is capable of addressing
only one screen at a time. Under the PM a Windows-like interface is presented and
each executing context can be visualized simultaneously as part of a sequence of
windows occupying the screen.

Sec. 1.3

31

The OS/2 Presentation Manager

It is programming of the OS/2 PM that constitutes the major enhancement of
Version 1.1. This programming employs techniques similar to those outlined in the
Windows Software Development Kit (SDK) [26-28] for development of Windows
programs.

1.3 THE OS/2 PRESENTATION MANAGER
It is worthwhile to look briefly at the Presentation Manager (PM) to get a feeling for

how this type of interface is implemented. The PM runs as an executive subset
under OS/2. IBM has developed the Systems Application Architecture (SAA) and
the PM implements the Common Programming Interface (CPI) component of SAA,
which makes portability to other SAA-supported environments (such as VM and
MVS on the System/370and Operating System/400on the Application System/400)
relatively straightforward.
Communications and network-intensive applications are not generally amenable
to the SAA without additional software support. The Extended Edition Version 1.1,
for example, is intended for these more uniquely hardware-specific applications.
Examples include airline reservation systems, bank transaction processing, some
large-scale process control applications, real-time processing, and communications
front-end (physical layer) processing.
The PM interacts with the OS/2 user via a graphical user interface [30-35]. By
graphical user interface we mean the screen appearance when the PM is invoked.
This display is illustrated in Figure 1.7 with a typical pulldown menu. The maximize/minimize buttons can be used to reduce the contents of the client area to an
icon. This icon can be restored using the mouse. The client area contains the visible
portion of the display context, which presents the active window interface. It is here
that the executing program displays its particular graphical context. The PM allows

Title Bar
System Menu Icon
Window Title

Maximize/Minimize/
Restore Buttons

Action Bar

Vertical Scroll Bar

Horizontal Scroll Bar
Pull Down

Figure 1.7 The Presentation Manager standard window.

The OS/2 Environment

32

Chap. 1

the client area to be subdivided into tiled (windows adjacent to each other) or
overlapped (windows lying on top of each other with varying offsets) windows. This
facilitates a partial display of the contents of several windows simultaneously.
In addition to the features illustrated in Figure 1.7, the programmer can call up
modal and modaless dialog boxes and message boxes. These can be used to achieve
I/0 in the PM context. A modal dialog box retains control of the execution until it
is destroyed (usually by clicking the mouse over a termination panel). A modaless
dialog box allows the PM to permit windows in other applications to be activated
after it has been created. A message box is a predefined dialog window available to
all applications for displaying text and receiving user 1/0.
The PM has a strong graphics capability (as differentiated from graphical
interface) with which computer-generated graphics may be displayed in the client
area. This Graphics Program Interface (GPI) employs API calls beginning with Gpi.
The PM also has a clipboard that can be used to hold intermediate data and resources (such as metafiles and bitmaps). A metafile defines the contents of a windowed picture so that it can be used by other applications. These metafiles are
created using GPI calls and conform to the Mixed Object Document Content Architecture (MODCA) interchange standard. A bitmap, on the other hand, is a representation in memory of data displayed on an all-points-addressable basis and requires
that the object in question be capable of being specified in this mode.
Finally, the programming for the interface itself employs a number of new
library elements. The PM executive is a dynamic program that is constantly accessing each application context for changes and conversing with the application via a
stream of messages. When an application executes various window functions, for
example, the function causes specific messages to be sent to the PM executive.
These are then interpreted and the executive generates a response.
The general PM program flow of activity is illustrated in Figure 1.8, where
termination of the window is accomplished by the executive in response to a
WM_QUIT message. This flowchart shows the setup code as distinct from the
message-processing loop, as it is. C is the language of choice for programming the
PM executive.
Conventional C programs have a basic template that appears as
Preprocessor
main()
{

functionl()
}
}

functionN ( )
{
{

Sec. 1.3

The OS/2 Presentation Manager

33

BEGIN

INITIALIZE
WINDOW

NORMAL
SETUP

GET
MESSAGE

y

TRANSLATE
MESSAGE

TERMINATE
WINDOW

SEND TO
WINDOW

EXIT

PROCESS
WINDOW

Figure 1.8 Dynamic picture of a
Windows application, similar to the PM
implementation.

Each function is callable internal to either main ()or another (group of) function(s).
A simple PM program with one window might have a template of the following
form:

34

The OS/2 Environment

Chap. 1

Preprocessor
void cdec 1 main ( argc / argv)
{

-code to initialize window
-loop to continuously read messages

sent from the executive

}

"window function
{

- this function directs execution to appropriate PM functions based on "message" input from the PM executive
}

"initialization functions"
{

-functions needed to initialize the
every instance of a window

first,

additional,

and

}

other needed user-defined

functions

Figure 1.9 illustrates a Structure Chart for the upper hierarchical levels of a PM
application. This chart is generic in the sense that it only indicates entities that are
common to all PM programs. The reader familiar with the Microsoft Windows
executive will see a close parallel between programming for this executive and
programming the PM executive [29].

000
PM
APPLICATION

l
100
INITIALIZE
WINDOW

110

l

ESTABLISH
INSTANCE

l

200

l
120

300
PROCESS
MESSAGE

EXIT
WINDOW

.l
.l

l

210

CHECK FOR
PREVIOUS
INSTANCE

221

l
230

220
GET
MESSAGE

r

RECEIVE
FORMATTED
MESSAGE

TRANSLATE
MESSAGE

l
222
CONVERT TO
INTERNAL
CODE

J

DISPATCH
MESSAGE

l
231
LOAD
MESSAGE
STRUCTURE

l

l
232
PASS
MESSAGE TO
WINDOW
PROCEDURE

Figure 1.9 Generic Structure Chart for the upper hierarchical levels of a
Presentation Manager application.

Sec. 1.4

Summary

35

1.4 SUMMARY
In this chapter we have introduced the IBM Operating System/2 in the framework
of the Intel 80286 and 80386 CPUs. Initially, the CPU registers were described and
the Protected Mode address space examined. The Protected Mode provides a framework from which to perform memory management and multitasking because of the
hardware interlocks into segment management. Basically, the access rights control
byte in the segment address translation register word determines what data and control segments will have access to a given memory location.
This segment control, then, is the mechanism by which the hardware delimits
Protected Mode access. This is applied to the software via the operating system (and
the local descriptor tables (LDTs) and the global descriptor table (GDT)). OS/2
provides system services similar to the BIOS and DOS interrupt services via the
family Applications Programming Interface (PAPI). The PAPI is a subset of the
more complete API functions, which represent a complete set of Protected Mode
services. Representative of these services are the following categories
1. Mouse (Mou)
2. Video (Vio)
3. DOS (Dos)
4. Graphical (Gpi)
5. Spool (Spl)
6. Device (Dev)
7. Keyboard (Kbd)
8. Window (Win)

The API calls, then, allow access to system hardware and file services under OS/2.
OS/2 has provision to add devices to the system by creation of additional device
drivers and input/output privilege level (IOPL) is assisted using the Dev and Dos
services.
The Presentation Manager (PM) represents the Version 1.1 user-friendly graphical interface for OS/2. Under Version 1.1 the user also has a choice of the fullscreen command prompt interface mode which is that employed by Version 1.0. The
PM display is similar to that used by Microsoft Windows Version 2.0 and provides
for overlapped (or tiled) window presentation of active process information in a
multitasking environment. The PM executive interacts dynamically with the executing programs. Associated with the PM are a large class of functions (window functions) used to regulate the interface under program control. The messages exchanged
between the PM executive and the program are continuous and dynamically varying.
Hence this executive provides a time-varying interactive display that can be updated
and controlled using the mouse. It is very similar to the interface provided by the
Apple Macintosh operating system.

36

The OS/2 Environment

Chap. 1

REFERENCES
1. Disk Operating System Version 3.30 Reference, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1986.
2. iAPX 86/88, 186/188 User's Manual: Programmer's Reference, Intel Corporation,
Santa Clara, CA, 1986.
3. iAPX 286: Programmer's Reference Manual, Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, 1985.
4. 80386 Programmer's Reference Manual, Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, 1986.
5. IBM Operating System/2 Standard Edition: User's Reference, International Business
Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1987.
6. IBM Operating System/2 Technical Reference, Vols. I and II, International Business
Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1988.
7. IBM Operating System/2 Programmer's Toolkit, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1987.
8. Microsoft Operating System/2 Software Development Kit, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1987.
9. IBM Operating System/2 Technical Reference Version 1.1: Programming Reference,
Vols. 1, 2, and 3, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1988.
10. Petzold, C., Presentation Manager Dialog Procedures, PC Magazine, September 1988,
p. 302.
11. Malloy, R., IBM's OS/2 Extended Edition, Byte Magazine, July 1988, p. 111.
12. Microsoft C 5.1 Optimizing Compiler Reference Manual, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1987.
13. IBM MacroAssembler/2 Reference Manual, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1987.
14. VEDIT PLUS Reference Manual, CompuView Products, Inc., Ann Arbor, MI, 1986.
15. Petzold, C., Introducing the OS/2 Presentation Manager, PC Magazine, July 1988,
p. 379.
16. IBM Technical Reference Personal Computer AT, International Business Machines
Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1984.
17. IBM Personal System/2 Model 50 and 60 Technical Reference, International Business
Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1987.
18. Tanenbaum, A. S., Operating Systems: Design and Implementation, Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1987, p. 36.
19. Davis, W. S., Operating Systems: A Systematic View, Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company, Reading, MA, 1987, p. 73.
20. Beck, L. L., System Software: An Introduction to Systems Programming, AddisonWesley Publishing Company, Reading, MA, 1985, p. 302.
21. Katzau, H., Operating Systems: A Pragmatic Approach, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York, 1986, p. 161.
22. Godfrey, J. T., IBM Microcomputer Assembly Language: Beginning to Advanced,
Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989, p. 423.
23. Letwin, G., Inside OS/2, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1988, p. 39.

37

Problems

24. Iacobucci, E., OS/2 Programmer's Guide, Osborne McGraw-Hill, Berkeley, CA, 1988,
p. 51.
25. Krantz, J.I., Mizell, A.M., and Williams, R.L., OS/2: Features, Functions, and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1988, p. 12.
26. Microsoft Windows Software Development Kit: Quick Reference Programming Guide,
Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1987.
27. Microsoft Windows Software Development Kit: Update/Programmer's Utility Guide,
Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1987.
28. Microsoft Windows Software Development Kit: Programmer's Reference, Microsoft
Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1987.
29. Godfrey, J.T., Applied C: The IBM Microcomputers, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1990 p. 356.
30. IBM Operating System/2 Programmer's Toolkit Version 1.1: Programming Overview,
International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1988.
31. IBM Operating System/2 Programmer's Toolkit Version 1.1: Programming Guide, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1988.
32. IBM Operating System/2 Programmer's Toolkit Version 1.1: Building Programs, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1988.
33. IBM Operating System/2 Technical Reference Version 1.1: !JO Subsystems and Device
Drivers, Vols. 1 and 2, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL,
1988.
34. IBM Operating System/2 Technical Reference Version 1.1: Macro Assembler/2 Bindings Reference, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1988.
35. IBM Operating System/2 Technical Reference Version 1.1: C/2 Bindings Reference,
International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1988.

PROBLEMS
1.1 In Real Address Mode assume a CS register value of 07F8H and an IP register value
of 274AH. What is the 20-bit physical address?
1.2 Does the fact that OS/2 is a multitasking operating system imply that it is a multiprocessor operating system, as well?
1.3 What is the largest fixed-point value that the 80386 can accommodate? Largest signed
fixed-point value?
1.4 The exit processing for OS/2 is via a call to DOSEXIT rather than a RET instruction.
If the requisite processing for DOSEXIT is
EXTRN

DosExit:FAR

PUSH

WORD

ActionCode

; Indicates

PUSH

WORD

ResultCode

;Result

CALL

DosExi t

end

Code

thread

or

process

38

The OS/2 Environment

Chap. 1

define a macro
@DosExit

1.5

action,

result

that can be used to setup and execute the exit operation.
The video screen unlock processing for OS/2 is via a call to VIOSCRUNLOCK. Assuming that the requisite processing for this call is
EXTRN VioScrUnLock: FAR
PUSH WORD VioHandle
CALL VioScrUnLock

;Video

handle

define a macro
@VioScrUnLock viohdl

1.6

that can be used to setup and execute the unlock operation.
The video screen lock processing for OS/2 is via a call to VIOSCRLOCK. Assuming
that the requisite processing for this call is
EXTRN VioScrLock:FAR
PUSH
PUSH
PUSH
CALL

WORD WaitFlag
BYTE Status
WORD VioHandle
VioScrLock

; Block or not
; Lock status returned
;Video handle

(address)

where PUSH@ means to push an address on the stack, define a macro
@VioScrLock wai tf, iostat, viohdl

that can be used to setup and execute the lock operation.
What are the three principal features that the OS/2 Standard Edition contributes over
conventional DOS operating system characteristics?
1.8 While 80286 code (source) will run on 80386 systems, why will 80386 applications
code generally not run on 80286 systems?
1.9 In the IBM PC AT, 16 levels of hardware interrupts are available to the system user.
How many 8259As are required to support this number of interrupt levels?
1.10 The DOS partition in the IBM microcomputer environment supports the first 1 MB of
addressable memory. Why do most early systems allow a maximum of only 640 KB
of program memory access? Where does OS/2 extended memory reside?
1.11 What is the difference between physical and virtual memory, and how is virtual
memory managed?
1.12 How does OS/2 differentiate system memory space from applications memory space?
How much virtual memory space is accessible by applications?
1.13 Why would data communications processing not reside at level 0 to ensure that no
data is lost during a communications session?
1.7

Problems

39

1.14 How does the 80286 CPU know that the system is to operate in Protected Mode?
1.15 When writing a device driver, mixed-language programming is probably an optimum
approach. Assuming that a driver is written using a combination of C and assembly
language, what parts are likely candidates for assembler code? What parts are likely
candidates for C code?
1.16 Explain the major difference between a pipe and a queue.
1.17 Would you say that the API implementation represents a favorable step for assembly
language programming of OS/2? For C programming of OS/2? Explain.
1.18 If two threads from the same process need to access a common data area, will they
run synchronously or asynchronously? If the threads are from different processes, will
they access in synchronous or asynchronous fashion?
1.19 What is the thread equivalent to DosKil!Process? How does it differ from the activity
for a process?
1.20 Can we use the Gpi services with full-screen command mode to generate screen
graphics under CGA, for example?
1.21 Which is preferred in a multitasking environment: modal or modaless dialog box
implementation?

PART II
Programming OS/2 Using Assembler

2 Introductory OS/2
Assembler Programming

OS/2 is a unique program environment devoid of the normal interrupt calls found in
conventional assembly language programs. In their place OS/2 implements Application Program Interface (API) function calls, which provide the programmer with access to system services. Specific services include the familiar DOS BIOS and
INT21H function calls, an enhanced set of video display handlers, mouse services,
and keyboard handlers. These are the most obvious extensions of OS/2, and they
permit the user a vastly increased capability to develop multitasking modules and
extend program usage beyond the normal 64K segment limit.
In this chapter we examine assembly language programming in the context of
OS/2 [1,2]. The goal of the exposition is to provide the reader with examples of the
usage of assembly language in the OS/2 framework. This is not a treatise on how to
program assembler; rather, we hope to achieve an understanding of the OS/2 interface.

2.1 OS/2 SERVICES: ACCESSING THE.AP!
A great deal of the new programming emphasis using OS/2 is the API services
which are contained in the IBM (or Microsoft) supplied library, API.LIB. The services contained in API.LIB can be accessed through uppercase specification of the
service name preceded by proper setup of parameter information appropriate to the
40

Sec. 2.1

OS/2 Services: Accessing the API

41

function in question. Unlike the DOS and BIOS interrupt routines, which pass
parameter information using the general-purpose registers, the OS/2 API procedures
receive parameters via the stack, which must be installed by the user. This is in
much the same fashion as the passing of parameters to functions or subroutines in
a higher-level language (HLL).
To understand how this works consider the video API call, which returns the
cursor position to two stack locations. This routine, VioGetCurPos, has the following calling sequence for the service [3]:
1. Define VioGetCurPos as EXTRN and FAR
2. PUSH a 32-bit address for
row
column

(word)
(word)

on the stack, respectively
3. PUSH a device handle
VioHandle (word)

on the stack
4. CALL VioGetCurPos
In this example the routine VioGetCurPos is treated in mixed upper and lower case
for readability. The actual OS/2 library reference is upper case:
VIOGETCURPOS

To continue to use the more readable mixed-case references, which are in the style
of the IBM references, the programmer must consider what is available or can be
developed to facilitate the use of these mixed-case calls. Fortunately, IBM provides
several include files (with extension .inc) for use with the assembler that set up
macros for using the API library. This setup includes loading the stack with the
proper parameters needed by the API service routine. OS/2 has two include files,
doscalls.inc and subcalls.inc, that properly develop macros to be called for API
service. These two files are loaded using a third file, sysmac.inc, which simply
installs doscalls and subcalls as macro libraries:
IFl
include sysmac. inc

END IF

The file doscalls.inc contains macros for calling all the Dos ... calls. The file
subcalls.inc contains macros for calling all kbd .. ., Mou .. ., and Vio... calls.

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

42

Chap. 2

Returning to VioGetCurPos, consider the subcalls macro used to set up and
call this service routine:
@VioGetCurPos

macro
@define
@pushs
@pushs
@pushw
call
endm

row, column, handle
VIOGETCURPOS
row
column
handle
far ptr VIOGETCURPOS

We see immediately that this macro calls three other macros: @define, @pushs, and
@pushw. These macros are defined as follows:
@define macro
ifndef
extrn
endif
endm
@pushs macro
.errb
mov
push
lea
push
endm
@pushw macro
mov
push
endm

callname
callname
callname:far

parm
<parm>
ax,SEG pa rm
ax
ax,parm
ax
pa rm
ax,parm
ax

Clearly, @define is used to get VIOGETCURPOS as an externally defined
FAR procedure (it appears in APl.LIB). The macro @pushs pushes a 32-bit address
for the dummy parameter, parm, onto the stack and @pushw pushes parm itself onto
the stack. The calling sequence for @VioGetCurPos sets up row and column to
receive the cursor position values after the final FAR call to VIOGETCURPOS.
This is how the OS/2 API services are accessed using assembly language and
the doscalls.inc, subcalls.inc, and sysmac.inc files. In this chapter we use only a
small subset of the API calls. These services are indicated in Table 2.1. Generally,
the focus of interest in this chapter is on the printer, keyboard interrupt, and screen
buffer, as the API calls of Table 2.1 indicate.
OS/2 reserves the right to redefine memory dynamically during program execution. This is necessary to implement multitasking and memory management of
huge segments (greater than 64K segments). Since OS/2 can access 16 Megabytes
(MB) of actual memory because of the 24-bit physical address size, it must map the
full virtual program memory into this space, or smaller, during program execution.
The virtual memory access may contain up to a full gigabyte (230 bytes) of individually addressable byte locations.

Sec. 2.2

Introductory Assembler Programming

43

Clearly, physical address space is normally difficult to access and naturally
remains the province of OS/2. In some cases, however, the programmer has access
to this dimension. We will see a situation of actually writing to the OS/2 physical
memory when the screen buffer
TABLE 2.1

API SUBSET USED IN CHAPTER 2

Comment

API function

Dos Open
DosExit
DosWrite
DosClose
VioScrollUp
VioSetMode
VioScrLock
VioGetPhysBuf
VioScrUnLock
KbdStringln

Open specified device or file
Terminates active threads and processes
Transfers the specified bytes from a buffer to the specified file
Closes the specified device or file
Scrolls the screen upward
Sets the graphics or alphanumeric screen mode
Locks the physical display buffer context
Retrieves a segment selector for the physical display buffer
Unlocks the physical display buffer context
Loads a keyboard buffer with a character string

is accessed in a subsequent example. It is possible to gain access to the screen
buffer by locking the screen context and then using a segment selector returned by
OS/2 for writing directly to the physical buffer containing the screen addresses. This
differentiates the IBM physical screen buffer, with its fixed physical locations in
memory, from other RAM addresses, which can vary in dynamic but protected fashions under OS/2.

2.2 INTRODUCTORY ASSEMBLER PROGRAMMING
As indicated earlier, we have assumed that the reader has a background in both
80286 assembler and the C language. This book does not teach either, but we do
provide a brief review of the syntax associated with the languages. In this section
we examine the macro assembler that is compatible with the Protected Mode.
Appendix A contains the Macro Assembler/2 instructions and pseudo-ops.

2.2.1 The IBM Macro Assembler/2
There are two reasons why programmers should be interested in assembly languages.
First, assembler provides an understanding about both the underlying software architecture for a given microprocessor and the needed chip interfaces for a given microcomputer. Second, situations can arise where other languages are inadequate for
achieving optimized performances. The Macro Assembler/2 has basically the same
features as other Intel assemblers. The dominant active instruments in the assembler
are the instructions with the form

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

44
[label]

instruction-mneumonic

[operand(s)]

Chap. 2

[;comment]

Here the brackets indicate that the quantities contained within are optional depending on instruction type. The instruction sequence
mov cx,1000
mov si,O
DOll:
mov ax,si
sub ax,100
cmp ax,O
je ELSEl
inc si
loop DOll

;load loop limit
;initialize index
;label for loop
;load ax with index
;subtract 100 from index
;check to see if zero
;jump if zero to ELSEl
;increment index
;loop back to DOll

ELSEl:

is an example of the use of the move(mov), subtraction(sub), jump-if-equal(je),
increment(inc), compare(cmp), and loop instructions. Note that the labels D011 and
ELSEl go with the next line of code. In this fragment the loop instruction decrements ex each time. When ax becomes zero the jump takes place to the target label
ELSEl. This very brief illustration of the assembler instruction usage is intended as
an example of the IBM Macro Assembler/2, MASM. For a complete discussion of
the assembler instructions, consult the Language Reference Manual [4].
In addition to the instructions the assembler has a class of statements that
provide information about the program environment. These statements do not result
in machine code and are referred to as pseudo-ops. Typical of the pseudo-ops is the
SEGMENT directive, which is used to demarcate the various segment definitions
within the source code. The SEGMENT pseudo-op has the form
sequence SEGMENT

align-type combine-type

'class'

where segname is the name of the segment. Align-type indicates how the segment
begins in memory [PARA: paragraph boundary [address divisible by 16]; BYTE;
WORD; or PAGE: last 8 bits of address are zero], and combine-type indicates how
the segment is to be linked [PUBLIC: all public segments with the same name are
linked; COMMON: all segments with the same name overlap; AT(exp): segment
located at nearest paragraph to "exp"; STACK: stack segment; and MEMORY:
higher addresses than other segments]. The designator 'class' refers to a collection
of segments with the same class name. Segments end with
segname ENDS

To define segment type the ASSUME pseudo-op is used to associate a name
with a segment register:
ASSUME CS: segname,

SS: segname [ , DS: segname [ , ES: segment] ]

Sec. 2.2

Introductory Assembler Programming

45

Here CS is required and SS is required when a stack segment is present. Both DS
and ES are optional. We could continue to enumerate the Macro Assembler features;
however, the best technique for elucidating the language is through illustration. In
the following section we consider such an example.
2.2.2 An Example Program: Printer Control
Figure 2.1 contains an assembler program that causes the printer to print in graphics mode under OS/2. The program opens with two pseudo-ops: PAGE and TITLE.
PAGE has the form
PAGE operand!, operand2

The entry in operandl indicates the number of horizontal lines per page in the assembler listing (here it is 55). Operand2 is the number of characters per line in the
listing. The TITLE pseudo-op specifies the title on the first line of each assembler
listing page. Spread throughout the program are semicolons. All text following a
semicolon on the same line is treated as a comment. The pseudo-op IFl (a conditional pseudo-op) indicates that all instructions and pseudo-ops following it and prior
to the next END IF are to be implemented during pass 1 of the assembler. In Figure
2.1 the file sysmac.inc is to be included at this point.
Sysmac causes doscalls.inc and subcalls.inc to be included which set up
macros for all API calls that appear in the subsequent code segments. The pseudoop .sall causes macro listings to be suppressed. Next follows the GROUP pseudo-op.
This pseudo-op collects the data segment under the name dgroup:
dgroup

GROUP

data

The stack segment follows. Here 256 copies of the string
STACK •••

are used to form the stack segment. This should be more than adequate for the stack
size required by most small programs. The pseudo-op, db, stands for define byte and
the dup operator duplicates the 8-byte string within parentheses.
The data segment follows and requires some explanation in conjunction with
the API calls that are in the code segment. Consider first the variables defined in
this data segment that begin dev_ .... There are eight of these variables and they are
defined in reference to the @DosOpen API macro call. Consider the form of this
call in the code segment
@DosOpen dev_name,dev_hand,dev_act,dev_size,
dev_attr,dev_flag,dev_mode,dev_rsv

This API call opens a file with file path name dev_name. The path is the zero-terminated string: 'LPTl',O. The file handle is returned with dev_hand. The action
taken is returned in dev_act, where

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

46

Chap. 2

PAGE 55,132
TITLE PRT2 - This is the initial printer routine (PRT2.ASM)
DESCRIPTION: This program simply prints a •74• in
graphics mode (320 times) for two lines which are
meshed together.
I Fl
include sysmac.inc
ENDIF
dgroup
STACK

.sall
GROUP

;Suppresses macro lists

data

STACK

SEGMENT PARA STACK 'STACK'
db
256 dup( 'STACK
')
ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'

;

in buff er
in:::leng
bytes in
bytesout
in bufferl
bytesinl
in buffer2
bytesin2
in_buffer3
bytesin3
in_buffer4

db
dw
dw
dw
db
dw
db
dw
db
dw
db

dev name
dev-hand

db
dw
dw
dd
dw
dw
dw
dd

dev-act
dev-size
dev-attr
dev:::flag
dev mode
dev=:rsv

400 dup(O)
$ - offset in_buff er
320
0
1BH,4BH,640,01H ; 320 columns
4

ODH,OAH
2
1BH,41H,08H
3
1BH,32H
'LPTl I ,o

0
0
0
0
OOOOOOOlb
;Open File
OOOOOOOOllOOOOOlb ;Hdl private,deny none,w/o
0

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
ASSUME CS:CSEG,DS:DATA,ES:DATA,SS:STACK
PROC
FAR
push ds
pop es

PRTSCl

;Open LP'l'l as device
@DosOpen dev name,dev hand,dev act,dev size,dev attr,dev flag,dev mode,dev rsv

cmp ix,o

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

je ELSEl

;Exit
@DosExit 1,0

ELSEl:
mov cx,320

; 320 columns

mov si,O

;initialize index

mov al,74

;pins 2,4,5, and 7
;load printer write buffer
;increment buffer index

LOOPl:
mov in buffer[si],al
inc siloop LOOPl

;Set lptl vertical spacing

Figure 2.1 ASsembler program prt2.asm, which prints printer graphics under
OS/2 Protected Mode.

Sec. 2.2

47

Introductory Assembler Programming

@DosWrite dev_hand,in_buffer3,bytesin3,bytesout
;Activate spacing
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_buffer4,bytesin2,bytesout
;Initialize printer graphics
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_bufferl,bytesinl,bytesout
;Write print buffer
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_buffer,bytesin,bytesout

;CR & LF
@Doswrite dev_hand,in_buffer2,bytesin2,bytesout
;Reset graphics mode
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_buffer1,bytesinl,bytesout
;Write print buffer again
@DosWrite dev hand,in buffer,bytesin,bytesout
;Close device
@DosClose dev_hand

;Exit
@DosExit 1,0

PRTSCl

endp

CSEG

ends

end PRTSCl

Figure 2.1 (Concluded)

OOOlH

file
file
file

0002H
0003H

exists
created
replaced

Here the file's size in bytes is returned in dev_size. The file attribute bits are defined as follows:
OOOlH

read only file
hidden file
system file
subdirectory
file archive

0002H
0004H

OOlOH
0020H

with other dev_attr combinations corresponding to reserved values. Dev_flag specifies the action to be taken if the file exists, where
OOOOOOOlB

indicates that the file should be opened. The dev_mode parameter has the form
15
bit:

0

D W F R R R R R I

S S S R A A A

where
D

w
F

=
=
=

0
0
0

means open in normal way
writes may be run through the DOS buffer cache
errors reported through system error handler

48

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

Chap. 2

reserved and must = 0
file handle is private to the current process
deny neither Read nor Write access
Write only access

= 0
= 1
= 100
AAA = 001

R
I
SSS

Hence
dev_mode

dw

OOOOOOOOllOOOOOlB

corresponds to file handle private, deny none, and write only. The parameter dev_rsv
must be zero. We will return to the remaining data segment variables as the code
segment API calls that use these variables are considered.
Following the termination of the data segment, DATA, the code segment is
developed. This segment, CSEG, opens with an ASSUME pseudo-op that associates
each segment register with an appropriate segment name. Here both DS and ES are
associated with DATA. Next a FAR procedure PRTSCl is set up. Notice that the
normal DOS program segment prefix (PSP) area is not required. The return is FAR
and will be accomplished using
@DosExit

1, 0

which automatically returns execution to the proper OS/2 entry point at the close of
PRTSCl. In this API call the first parameter is set to 1 and causes all threads in the
process to end. The second parameter is the result code, and this is used by any
threads requiring input from the process prior to its termination.
Upon entry to PRTSCl, DS is pushed on the stack and popped into ES. Then
@DosOpen is called as discussed above. The return value from this call is in ax
and, if 0, means that a normal open occurred. If ax is not zero, @DosExit is called.
To understand the remaining instructions and macro calls, it is necessary to understand how the printer works in graphics mode. The @DosOpen macro opens LPTl
(the line printer) as a file. This file can be written using the @DosWrite macro. The
line printer used in this example is an EPSON FX-85 [S]. The @DosWrite macro
can be used to pass characters for output to the printer as well as passing control
codes. We would like to use the printer in graphics mode.
The print head consists of a vertical array of eight pins. In graphics mode
these pins have an associated weight as follows:
PIN
0

•
0
0

e

WEIGHT

128
64
32
16
8

Introductory Assembler Programming

Sec. 2.2

49

4

0

2
1

0

Here three pins have been darkened to indicate that they are active. The total sum
of the pin values for these darkened pins is 74; hence when in graphics mode, a 74
output to the printer will cause these pins to print. Similarly, 255 would cause all
pins to print. Also, 128 would cause only the top pin to print.
How is the printer placed in graphics mode? Most of the printer control characters are of the form ESC.... To put the printer in single-density graphics mode the
sequence
ESC

"K"

(nl)

(n2)

must be sent. Using ESC = lBH and "K" = 4BH, it follows that if
nl
n2

d

MOD 256
( d/256)

= INT

where d = total number of columns to be printed, then
4BH,

lBH,

640,

DlH

corresponds to setting the printer in the graphics mode with a total of 320 printer
columns active, out of a possible 480 for the FX-85.
Returning to the code appearing in Figure 2.1, we see that the buffer,
in_bufferQ, is loaded with 320 values of 74 (the character value corresponding to
the pins discussed earlier). Following the loading of this buffer the macro call
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_buffer3,bytesin3,bytesout

is made. Here
in_buffer3 = 1BH,41H,08H

where the first character is ESC. The second character sets the vertical spacing to
/12-inch line spacing:

8

ESC A (8)

The third parameter in all the @DosWrite calls is the buffer length, and the
fourth parameter is the number of bytes written. The macro call
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_buffer4,bytesin2,bytesout

executes
ESC

2

50

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

Chap. 2

which implements the line spacing set above. The macro call
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_bufferl,bytesinl,bytesout

sets up the call
ESC

K 64

1

to specify 320 columns. This command must be followed by 320 characters. The
command
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_buffer,bytesin,bytesout

outputs 320 columns, corresponding to the 74 graphics combination already illustrated.
Next
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_buffer2,bytesin2,bytesout

causes ODH and OAH to be output for the carriage return and line feed. This is followed by a reset of the graphics mode and a second print of the 320 values of the
graphics mode 74. Figure 2.2a illustrates the output for this program. When the
buffer value is changed from 74 to 255, all pins print. This case is illustrated in
Figure 2.2b.

(a)

(b)
Figure 2.2 Printer output from prt2.asm (a) with fill character "74" and (b)
with fill character "255".

The program appearing in Figure 2.1 illustrates the main features of how to access the API from assembler. Here the printer was accessed using API calls and
placed in graphics mode as well as used to output graphics characters. In the next
section we look at more complex programs that access the screen buffer. Since we
have information about the screen pixels, it will be possible to develop a screen
print program that uses the printer in graphics mode to print the screen.

51

Accessing the Video Services

Sec. 2.3

2.3 ACCESSING THE VIDEO SERVICES
To be able to access the screen context requires a knowledge of the physical
memory associated with the display. This memory has different partitioning depending on what display mode is being used. Typically, the graphics modes normally accessed by the IBM PS/2 computers (and the IBM AT) are Color Graphics Adapter
(CGA) mode, which is a 320-column by 200-row pixel screen, the Enhanced Graphics Adapter (EGA) mode, which is a 640-column by 350-row pixel screen, and the
Video Graphics Adapter (VGA) mode, which is a 640-column by 480-row pixel
screen.
2.3.1 The Display Buffer
In this chapter we access the CGA screen context. This is mode Hex 5. The
memory is allocated into two buffer regions specified as follows:

1. Even Scans (rows 0, 2, 4, ... , 198) starts at address B8000H.
2. Odd Scans (rows 1, 3, 5, ... , 199) starts at address BAOOOH.
3. Each raster row occupies 80 bytes, where a byte has the following form:
Pixel:

N+l

N

Cl

co

Cl

N+2

co

Cl

N+3

co

Cl

co

with color section determined by
C1

co

0
0

0

black

1

light cyan

1

0
1

light magenta
intensified white

1

4. Address B8000H contains the pixel information for the first four pixels in the
upper left-hand corner.
There is a second CGA mode, which is 640 columns by 200 rows; however, we
will not consider this mode. We use the terms pe/ and pixel interchangeably herein.
How does the actual location of a pixel attribute get set based on row and
column data about the screen? To locate the correct (row, col) byte in screen buffer
physical memory, it must be remembered that the even-row value starts at location
80

*

(row/2)

offset from B8000H. Similarly, recognizing that integer division truncates (3/2

52

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

Chap. 2

becomes 1, ...), the same expression serves to locate an odd-row relative to
BAOOOH. Since there are 80 bytes for 320 columns, we need to locate
col/4

Hence the offset location of a given byte in terms of (row,col) is given by
80

* (row/2) + (col/4)

This would correspond to the code
mov
shr
mov
mul
mov
shr
shr
add

ax,row
ax,l
dx,O ; clear upper
eighty
bx,col
bx,l
bx,l
ax,bx

To identify an individual pixel within a byte, we note that the least significant
bit (LSB) and LSB+1 correspond to the attribute positions for the fourth pixel,
(LSB+2, LSB+3) correspond to the attribute positions for the third pixel, and so on.
Hence
Bit:

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Pixel:

1

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

We will simply turn the pixel on using a mask:
MASKl = OlH

This will produce a light cyan screen color. Dividing col by 4 generates a remainder (0,1,2,3), which is in reverse order to the pixel number (assuming that we start
numbering the pixels within a byte 0,1,2,3). Hence
3-col mod 4

indicates the actual pixel position within the (row,col) byte. Starting with
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1

it is clear that a shift
2 * ( 3-col mod 4 )

Sec. 2.3

53

Accessing the Video Services

will place 1 in bits 6, 4, 2, or 0 as needed to specify the pixel attribute. The following code uses the coprocessor to load xxx with this pixel value based on row, col:
fild four
fild col
fprem
fistp xx
fistp dummy
mov al,3
mov bl,byte ptr xx
sub al,bl
mov ah,O
mul two
mov cl,al
mov al,MASKl
shl al,cl
mov xxx,cl

;modulo

;MASKl

OlH

This, then, is a prescription for using a screen direct memory access (DMA) technique to the video physical buffer, once that buffer has been accessed.
The last code necessary to complete specification of a video buffer location is
to specify the precise offset location for address above. Here we assume that the
even-row or odd-row location must also be taken into consideration. Consider the
code
mov
and
cmp
jle

ax,row
ax,MASKll
ax,O
ELSEl
mov ax, address
add ax,OFFSETl
jmp IFll

;MASKll=OOOlH

;OFFSETl

2000H

ELSEl:
mov ax,address
IFll:
mov bp,ax
mov al,xxx
or es: [bp] ,al

This code checks to see if the row is even or odd. If odd, an offset of 2000H
is added to address. The full pixel byte offset is in address and the byte value in
xxx. Assuming that the extra segment register contains the video segment selector
value, then

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

54

Chap. 2

ov es:[bp],al

changes the bit values from 00 to 01 as needed for the pixel in question.
2.3.2 Locking the Screen Context

Figure 2.3a presents a function flowchart for a program that plots two lines across
the screen. Figure 2.3b illustrates this program, which calls the video buffer and
plots two parallel lines across the screen. The program also calls a routine scr_ld
that loads an intermediate buffer, scr_buffer, with the screen context pixel values.
This buffer is then used to output the display context to the printer. We will not
focus on the routines that write the display context to the printer until Section 2.3.3.
In this section we examine the video API calls.
Consider the first executable instruction in the program the call to els to clear
the screen. The procedure els, in turn, has a single call (besides the return):
@VioScrollUp

tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl

The parameters appearing in this API call are among the first nine parameters
appearing in the data segment. Viohdl is a handle to the display. The parameters tr
and le are the top row and left column to be scrolled. The parameters br and vc are
the bottom row and right column to be subtended for the scroll operation. A parameter no line is the number of lines to be scrolled and blank the attribute to be
used to replace each character (in this case a blank) pair. This routine effectively
blanks the screen.
Next the main FAR procedure sets the screen in CGA graphics mode. To do
this the video API call is made referencing the video handle and a CGA structure
that contains parameter data:
@VioSetMode

CGAm, viohdl

The video CGA structure is specified in the data segment by the required parameter values between the statements
CGAm

label

vrCGA dw

FAR

200

where the last value is the number of rows (the vertical resolution) on the CGA
screen. Below this structure in the data segment is a second structure, STDm, which
is used later with the call to return to text 80 x 25 mode. This structure spans the
lines between
STDm label
vr80

dw

400

FAR

Sec. 2.3

Accessing the Video Services

55

SETUP BUFFER &
DATA AREAS

CLEAR SCREEN

SETCGAMODE

RE-CLEAR SCREEN

LOCK DISPLAY
CONTEXT

GET PHYSICAL
BUFFER

DRAW LINES

SETUP TEMPORARY
PLOT BUFFER

UNLOCK SCREEN

HESITATE DISPLAY

RETURN TO
STANDARD MODE

PRINT DISPLAY
CONTEXT

EXIT

Figure 2.3a Functional flowchart for
boxprtl.asm, the program that calls the
video buffer and plots two lines.

56

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

PAGE 55,132
TITLE BOXPRTl - This program checks print graphics(BOXPRTl.ASM)
DESCRIPTION: This program plots two lines in protected
mode and hesitates usinq a keyboard delay. Graphics

mode 05H is used to display the lines •
. 8087
PUBLIC

xx,xxx

EXTRN
I Fl

prtscr:FAR,scr_ld:FAR

;CodeView symbol map

include sysmac.inc

ENDIF
dgroup
STACK

.sall
GROUP

;suppresses macro lists

data

SEGMENT PARA STACK 'STACK'
256 dup( 'STACK
')

db

STACK

ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'

PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC

in_buffer,bytesin,bytesout,in_bufferl,bytesinl

in_buffer2,bytesin2,in_buffer3,bytesin3,in_buffer4
dev name,dev hand,dev act,dev size,dev attr,dev flag

dev-mode,dev-rsv,MM,c011,N
s,eight,eighfy,four,shiftl,scr_buffer

-

sixforty,N4,ddd,w,bl

;

viohdl
result

action
tr
le
br
re

equ
dw
equ
dw
dw
dw

23

dw

79

25
0007H

dw

CGAm
label
lmodeE dw
typeCGA db
colCGA db
txtcCGA dw
txtrCGA dw
hrCGA
dw
vrCGA
dw
STDm
label
lmode80 dw
type80 db
col80
db
txtc80 dw
txtr80 dw
hr80
dw
vr80
dw
kbd buf db
lkbd buf dw
iowait dw
kbdhdl equ
waitf
dstat

equ
db

;Required video handle
;Completion code
;Terminates current thread

0
0

no line dw
blank

0
0
0

FAR
12

;Top row screen clear
;Left column screen clear
;Bottom row screen clear
;Right column screen clear
;Number lines scrolled
;Blank character pair

OOOOOlllB

;Video mode structure-CGA
;Structure length
;Mode identifier

2

;Color option-Mode 5

40
25
320
200

;text characters/line-ignore
;text lines-ignore
;horizontal resolution
;vertical resolution

FAR
12

OOOOOOOlB
4
80
25
720

400
80
$-kbd buf
0
0

1

;Video mode structure-80x25

;Structure length
;Mode identifier-Mode 3+
;Color option
;text characters/line
;text lines
;horizontal resolution
;vertical resolution
;Keyboard buffer

;Length keyboard buffer
;Wait for CR
;Keyboard handle
;Screen waiting status
;Returned status

Figure 2.3b Program code for boxprtl.asm.

Chap. 2

Sec. 2.3

57

Accessing the Video Services

;

PVBPtrl label
buf stl dd
buflenl dd
physell dw

FAR
OB8000H
4000H
0

MAS Kl
db
MASKll dw
OFFSETl dw
four
dw
xx
dw
dummy
dw
two
db
xxx
db
eighty dw
row
dw
col
dw
address dw

OlH
OOOlH
2000H
4
?
?
2
?
80
?

x
y
xb
xe
yb
ye

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

?
?
75
150
25
175

eight

dw

8

;Video buffer structure
;Start physical address
;Buffer length
;OS/2 screen buffer selector
;PEL byte mask
;Odd/even row mask

;Odd row buffer offset
;PEL modulo parameter
;80287 dummy "pop"

;Output value

?

;row
;column

?

;Address screen dot

;Box col parameter
;Box row parameter
;Start column

;End column
;Start row
;End row

Data area below is used for screen print routine.

;

in buffer
bytesin dw
bytes out
in buf ferl
bytesinl
in buffer2
bytesin2
in buffer3
bytesin3
in_buffer4

.

dev name
dev-hand
dev-act
dev=size
dev attr
dev=flag
dev mode

db

320
dw

1BH,4BH,64D,01H ;printer setup

dw

4
ODH,OAH
2
lBH, 41H, 08H
3
1BH,32H

db

dw
db

dw
db
db

dev=rsv
N4

dw

MM

db
db
db
db

s

ddd
sixforty
scr_buffer

0

;print buffer
;CGA line
;output count

db

dw
dw
dd
dw
dw
dw
dd

w
cell
bl
N
shiftl

320 dup(O)

dw
db
db

dw
dw
db

;count bytes In_bufferl
;LF/CR

;in_buffer2 byte count
;in_buffer3 byte count

1 LPT1 1 ,0
;name of printer device
;device handle
0
0
0
0
OOOOOOOlb
;Open File
OOOOOOOOllOOOOOlb
;hdl private,deny none,w/o
0
;reserved

?
40H,lOH,04H,OlH ;pel mask
;pin weights
320 dup(?)
;column index-printer
4 dup(?)
?
;printer line
128,64,32,16,B,4,2,l

6,4,2,0

4 dup(?)
?
640
16384 dup(O)

;dup copies pel byte
;temporary buffer--screen values

Figure 2.3b (Continued)

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

58

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'

assume cs:cseq,ds:dqroup
0621

PROC

FAR

call els
@VioSetMode CGAm,viohdl
call clsCGA
@VioScrLock waitf ,dstat,viohdl
@VioGetPhysBuf PVBptrl,viohdl
push physell
pop es

;Clear screen
;Set CGA Graphics mode
;Clear CGA screen
;Lock screen context

;Get physical buffer selector

;Save selector
;Load selector into extra seqment

mov ax,o
mov y,ax
call lineh
mov ax,100
mov y,ax
call lineh

;Draw line
;draw second line

call scr_ld
@VioscrUnLock

viohdl

;Unlock screen context

@!CbdStrinqin kbd_buf,lkbd_buf ,iowait,kbdhdl
@VioSetMode STDm,viohdl

;hesitate

;80 x 25 alpha mode

call prtscr
@DosExit action,result
0621

ENDP

els

PROC

;Terminate process

NEAR

@VioScrollUp tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl
ret
els

ENDP

;

clsCGA

PROC

NEAR

@VioScrLock waitf,dstat,viohdl
@VioGetPhysBuf PVBptrl,viohdl
push physell
pop es

mov bp,o

;Lock screen context

;Get physical buffer

;Screen selector
;Load extra segment

;Start offset zero

mov al,O

;Zero attribute-clear

mov es: [bp) ,al
inc bp
cmp bp,1F3FH
jle 001

;Clear byte

001:
;Check end 1st buffer

mov bp,2000H
mov al,O

;Offset 2nd buffer-odd

mov es: [bp] ,al
inc bp
cmp bp,3F3FH

;Clear byte

;Zero attribute-clear

002:
;Check end 2nd buffer

Figure 2.3b (Co11tinued)

Chap. 2

Sec. 2.3

59

Accessing the Video Services

jle 002
@VioScrUnLock viohdl
clsCGA

ret
ENDP

wdot

PROC

;Unlock screen context

NEAR

(col,row)

= (x,y)

fild four
fild col

;Load stack with 4
;ST = col, ST(l)
4

fprem

;Modulo
;Store remainder in xx

fistp xx
fistp dummy

;Pop stack

mov al,3
mov bl,byte ptr xx
sub al,bl
mov ah,O
mul two
mov cl,al

; (J - col % 4)

;Clear upper multiplicand

;Shift value for PEL

mov al,MASKl

;PEL color mask

shl al,cl

;Shift to correct PEL

mov xxx,al

;Store buffer value

mov ax,row

;Begin address calculation

shr ax,1
mov dx,o

;Clear upper multiplicand

mul eighty
mov bx,col

;Convert column value to bytes

;

;Divide row by 2

shr bx,1

shr bx,1
add ax,bx
mov address,ax
mov ax,row
and ax,MASKll
cmp ax,o

;offset in ax
;Save offset base

;Check even/odd row
;Look for bit o set

jle ELSEl
mov ax,address

add ax,OFFSETl
jmp IFll

;add odd buffer offset

ELSEl:
mov ax,address

IFll:
mov bp,ax
mov al,xxx

;screen buffer address
;Attribute value for dot

or es:(bp],al

;Write dot

wdot

ret
ENDP

lineh

PROC
y

NEAR

= row position, xb

begin, xe = end

mov ax,y
mov row,ax

;Establish row for wdot

mov ax,o
mov xb,ax
mov ax,319
mov xe,ax
mov ax,xb

;x-begin position for line

;x-end position for line
;Establish start column

Figure 2.3b (Continued)

60

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

Chap. 2

0010:
mov col,ax

;Save column value
;Write dot (col,row)
;Recall column

push ax
call wdot
pop ax
inc ax

;Increment column
;Check end horizontal line

cmp ax,xe

jle 0010
lineh

ret
ENDP

;

CSEG

ENDS
END

0821

Figure 2.3b (Concluded)

appearing in the data segment. Finally, a call to clsCGA is made, which reclears the
screen in CGA mode. This call is needed because the switch to CGA mode leaves
the screen in an unpredictable state. The call to clsCGA is somewhat different than
the prior els call because the screen is now in CGA mode and the screen context
must be locked prior to accessing it.
In the procedure clsCGA, the first executable statement is the macro call
@VioScrLock wai tf, dstat, viohdl

This call locks (or requests ownership) of the physical display buffer. The flag waitf
is 0 if the screen is not available; otherwise, it is 1. The status, dstat, is 0 if the lock
is successful; otherwise, it is 1, and viohdl is the video handle. Once this routine is
executed the physical buffer may be accessed. This is accomplished using the statement
@VioGetPhysBuf PVBPtrl, viohdl

Here PVBPtrl is a structure with the form (see data segment)
PVBPtrl
bufstl
buflenl
physell

label
dd
dd
dw

FAR
0B8000H
4000H
0

The first parameter in this structure, bufstl, is the start address of the physical display buffer specified as a 32-bit physical address. We see that this is merely the
beginning of the CGA even-row buffer space, as described above for normal IBM
memory allocation (B8000H). The second parameter, buflenl, is the length of the
buffer, which is 4000H or 16384 bytes long. Finally, physell is the physical selector which is returned by the call. Upon completion of the call the physical selector
value is immediately loaded in the extra segment register es. Hence, es then points

Sec. 2.3

Accessing the Video Services

61

to the beginning of the physical buffer. This step is very important because it
confirms the translation of the segment registers and the segment arithmetic for
calculating a physical or virtual address. Following the loading of the selector
address, the two buffer regions are cleared: even rows (offset 0-1F3FH) and odd
rows (offset 2000H-3F3FH). Then the screen context is unlocked with the call
@VioScrUnlock viohdl

The actual screen write is accomplished using two calls to the procedure lineh, one
call at y value 0 and one call at y value 100 (halfway down the screen). The form
of lineh use in this program merely draws a straight horizontal line from column 0
to column 319 of the screen. The actual drawing of the dot is accomplished by a
procedure wdot, which implements the techniques of section 2.3.1 discussed earlier.
Following the plotting of the two horizontal lines on the display, the screen
context is loaded in the buffer, scr_buffer, based on a call to scr_ld. Eventually, the
screen is printed using prtscr, which employs this buffer as a template of the screen
context. The screen is next unlocked and the keyboard pause or hesitation is instituted with the call
[@kbdStringin kbd_buf,lkbd_buf,iowait,kbdhdl

Here kbd_buf is a buffer for a character string that is 80 bytes wide. The variable
lkbd_buf is the length of this buffer. A value of 0 for iowait indicates that the
system should wait or hesitate if a character is not available. The parameter kbdhdl
is the handle to the keyboard device context. This call, of course, pauses the action
and allows the user to view the screen.
The second call to @VioSetMode returns the video context to 80 x 25 text
mode. Calling prtscr prints the intermediate screen buffer on the printer as described
above,. Finally, @DosExit causes the program to exit back to OS/2. Figure 2.4 is the
actual print of the screen output.

Figure 2.4 Output print screen from boxprtl.asm (Figure 2.3b).

62

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

Chap. 2

2.3.3 Printing the Graphics Screen under OS/2
In Figure 2.3 a portion of the data segment was devoted to parameters and variables
used by scr_ld and prtscr for the printer dump of the screen context. These variables
appeared earlier in the program of Figure 2.1, where a simple graphics print output
was generated. In this section we address the topic of how to achieve a printout of
the graphics screen context. This is similar to employing GRAPHICS.COM under
DOS except that our screen print program does not run in the background but is
directly callable by the program executing. IBM and Microsoft did not provide the
equivalent of GRAPHICS.COM with their system software during the early releases
of OS/2. Hence this program is both useful for obtaining a hard copy of the graphics screen and as information for illustrating the combined techniques of display
access and graphics printer output.
We have seen how to access the screen physical buffer using API calls. Also,
we saw a routine, scr_ld, used ostensibly to load a buffer scr_buffer. Figure 2.5
illustrates this routine and we see it is a very simple procedure with no API calls.
Only the byte array, scr_buffer, is external. The routine also interleaves the even and

PAGE 55,132
TITLE SCRLD -- This routine loads the screen print buffer (scrld.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This routine accompanies prtscr to load
and print the screen in 320 x 200 mode.
The prtscr buffers are assumed loaded. This is an OS/2
routine.

EXTRN

scr_buffer:BYTE

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
PUBLIC

scr_ld

scr_ld

PROC
ASSUME

FAR
CS: CSEG

.sall

mov cx,100
mov di, o
mov si, O

;no. of raster pairs
;index to screen buffer
;index to dummy array

0055:
push ex

mov cx,so

;raster row length

mov al, es: [di]
mov ah,es:[di+2000H]
lea bx,scr buffer[O]
mov ds:[bx+si],al
mov ds:[bx+si+SO],ah

;load even row physical buffer
;odd row physical buffer
;dummy buffer
;load even rows
;odd rows

D056:

inc si
inc di
loop D056
add si,ao
pop ex

;skip to next double set

loop 0055
scr_ld
CSEG

ret
ENDP
ENDS
END

Figure 2.5 Routine to set up temporary screen print buffer.

Sec. 2.3

Accessing the Video Services

63

odd rows from the physical buffer regions into a single buffer area which represents
the full screen context in contiguous fashion.
Figure 2.6a illustrates the function flowchart for the print screen routine. Figure
2.6b contains the actual print screen routine. All the printer parameters referenced in
the earlier data segments appear as external variables and are defined as such at the
beginning of the program. Following the usual loading of sysmac.inc, the program
starts immediately with the code segment, CSEG. The routine prtscr is declared
PUBLIC. In general, our approach will be to treat prtscr and scr_ld as externally
callable modules whenever a printer screen dump is desired. Hence these two
modules will become workhorse functions for illustrating graphics displays and the
reader can expect to encounter them throughout the book. Shortly we will install
them in a general-purpose library GRAPHLIB.LIB where they will be universally
accessible. The only difficult part about programming in this fashion is the large
data segment areas that are needed to set up the calls to these printer procedures
(and the screen parameter areas).
Returning to Figure 2.6, we see immediately the usual call, @DosOpen, to
open the printer device context. This was discussed in reference to Figure 2.1. Since
this program returns to a calling procedure, the ret instruction is implemented rather
than @DosExit. The sequence of API calls to @DosWrite is generally in agreement
with the earlier programming of Figure 2.1 except that the double output is omitted.
A loop is set up to increment 25 times, once for each eight-line graphics print. This
yields a total of 200 rows displaced vertically. These rows correspond to the actual
screen buffer rows for the raster scan. Since each row of the screen buffer consists
of 80 bytes of pixel data, eight rows at a time correspond to blocks of 640 bytes of
data.
The call to ldarray sets up the output for the printer eight rows at a time.
Basically, a small 32-element buffer, coll[], is loaded with the four pixels' worth of
data contained in each byte of the physical display buffer. This is done for the same
byte from eight consecutive rows of the screen buffer. Hence ldarray sets up a group
of pixel data representing a block of the screen context. To do this an array of four
elements, s[O] to s[3], is loaded with a byte of the screen buffer data from
scr_buffer. Each pixel is then masked off from its position in this byte, shifted, and
weighted to generate the correct graphics printer character. The weights, for example, contained in the array, w[], must be specified in the calling program's reserved printer data area in the usual fashion. It is this technique that is used to load
the array coll[].
Returning to prtscr itself, we see that after each eight-line block by 320 columns is loaded and in_buffer[] properly loaded the graphics print is implemented.
This is in the fashion of Figure 2.1 and is followed by a carriage return and line
feed. Once the complete screen dump to the printer has been accomplished, prtscr
closes the printer device handle with
@DosClose

dev_hand

and returns to the calling routine.

64

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

Chap. 2

OPEN PRINTER
DEVICE

y

INCREMENT
LINE COUNT

CLOSE PRINTER
DEVICE

LOAD
PRINTER ARRAY

EXIT

y

INCREMENT
ROW POINTER

LOAD
PRINTER BUFFER

WRITE
PRINTER BUFFER

LF&CR

INCREMENT BUFFER
POSITION 640

Figure 2.6a Functional flowchart for
prtscr, the screen dump routine.

Sec. 2.3

65

Accessing the Video Services

PAGE
TITLE

55,132
prtscr - print screen (prtscr.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This routine prints the screen in
320 x 200 CGA mode. This routine needs the
following data items in the calling routine
data segment:

in buffer
byt'esin
bytes out
in bufferl
bytesinl
in buffer2
bytesin2
in buffer3
bytesin3
in_buf f er4

db

dw
dw
db
dw
db
dw
db
dw
db

320 dup(O)
320
0
lBH, 4BH, 64D, OlH
4
ODH, OAH
2
1BH,41H,08H
3
1BH,32H

dev name

dev mode
dev=rsv dd

db
dw
dw
dd
dw
dw
dw
0

0
0
0
0
OOOOOOOlb
000000001100000lb

MM
w
coll
N
N4
s
shiftl
eight
eighty
bl
four
ddd
sci buff er
sixforty

db
db
db
dw
dw
db
db
dw
dw
db
dw
dw
db
dw

dev-hand
dev-act

dev-size
dev-attr

dev:=flag

EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN

'LPT1 1 ,0

40H,lOH,04H,OlH
128,64,32,16,8,4,2,1

320 dup(?)
?
?
dup(?)
6,4,2,0

8
80
4 dup(?)
4

16192 dup(O)
640

MM:BYTE,w:BYTE,coll:BYTE
in buffer:BYTE,in bufferl:BYTE,in buffer2:BYTE
in:=buffer3:BYTE,in_buffer4:BYTE bytesin:WORD,bytesinl:WORD,bytesin2:WORD,bytesin3:WORD
bytesout:WORD,dev name:BYTE,dev hand:WORD
dev act:WORD,dev size:DWORD,dev-attr:WORD
dev:=flag:WORD,dev_mode:WORD,dev:=rsv:DWORD
N:WORD,N4:WORD
eighty:WORD,eight:WORD,four:WORD,s:BYTE,shiftl:BYTE
scr_buffer:BYTE,ddd:WORD,bl:BYTE,sixforty:WORD

!Fl
include sysmac.inc

END IF
.sall
CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
PUBLIC prtscr

Figure 2.6b Routine to print the screen once the physical display buffer is
captured.

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

66

prtscr

PROC

FAR

ASSUME

CS:CSEG

Chap. 2

;open device
@DosOpen dev name,dev hand,dev act,dev size,dev attr,dev flag,dev mode,dev rsv
cmp ix, o
je ELSEl

;Exit
ret
ELSEl:

;initialize device
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_buffer3,bytesin3,bytesout
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_buffer4,bytesin2,bytesout
;number print lines(+l)
;index to 8 row block

mov dx,25

mov si,O
LOOPl:

;preserve dx
;preserve block count

push dx
push si
mov ax,si
mul sixforty

;640 block size
;Save in N

mov N,ax
call ldarray
mov di,o
mov cx,80

;initialize 320 column counter
;count of column bytes

mov al,coll[di]

;column 1 from byte
;load print buffer
;column 2 from byte
;load print buffer
;column 3 from byte
;load print buffer
;column 4 from byte
;load print buffer
;increment column index

LOOP2:
mov in buffer(di],al
mov al~coll[di+l]

mov in_buffer[di+l],al
mov al,coll[di+2]
mov in_buffer[di+2],al
mov al,coll[di+3]
mov in buffer[di+3],al
add di~four

loop LOOP2
;write print row
@DosWrite dev hand,in bufferl,bytesinl,bytesout
@DosWrite dev-hand,in-buffer,bytesin,bytesout
@DosWrite dev=hand,in=buffer2,bytesin2,bytesout
pop si
pop dx
dee dx
inc si
cmp dx,O
jle DIIl
jmp LOOPl

;recall block count
;recall print line count
;decrement count
;increase block count
;check 25 lines printed

@DosClose dev_hand
ret
endp

;close print device

Diil:
prtscr

ldarray PROC

NEAR

N is the printer row # - 640 byte intervals [0,24]
MM[OJ s 40H, ••• ,MM[3) = OlH (pel mask)
w[OJ = 128,w[l] = 64, ••• ,w(7] = 1
mov si,O
mov cx,320

:column count initialization
; 320 columns

mov al,O
mov coll[si],al
inc si

;clear print buffer

00110:
;increment column count

Figure 2.6b

(Continued)

Sec. 2.3

Accessing the Video Services

67

loop 00110
mov si,o
mov N4,si
mov dx,so

index into 80 bytes/row
= row byte block count
counter - row bytes

N4

00111:
mov di,O
mov ddd,di
mov ex, a

;raster row counter (1 of 8)
;SO block counter

push ex

;preserve row count

;raster row counter

00112:
;bp = # 80 byte blocks

mov bp,ddd
add bp,N
push bx
lea bx,scr_buffer(O]

add bp,bx
mov al,ds: [bp+si]
pop bx
mov s[O],al
mov s[l],al
mov s[2],al
mov s[3] ,al
and al,MM[O]
mov cl,shiftl(OJ
shr al,cl
mov ah,O
mul W(di)
mov bl[O] ,al
mov al,s(l]
and al,MM(l]
mov cl,shiftl[l]
shr al,cl
mov ah,O
mul w(di]
mov bl [ l],al
mov al,s(2]
and al,MM[2]
mov cl,shiftl[2]
shr al,cl
mov ah,O
mul w(di]
mov bl[2],al
mov al,s[3]
and al,MM[3]
mov cl, shiftl ( 3]
shr al,cl
mov ah,O
mul w[di]
mov bl[J],al
push bx
mov bx,N4
mov al,bl(O]
add coll [bx]. al
mov al,bl[l]
add coll (bx+l], al
mov al,bl[2J
add coll(bx+2],al
mov al,bl[3]
add coll[bx+J],al
pop bx

Figure 2.6b

;add printer line count
;preserve bx
;load address screen buffer
;add to index

;4 pel bytes
;1st copy
;2nd copy
;3rd copy
;4th copy
;1st pel mask
;load 1st pel shift

;shift right
;clear upper

;multiply by weight (row)
;save 1st printer column

;load 2nd pel
;mask 2nd pel
;load 2nd pel shift
; shift right
;clear upper
;multiply by weight (row)
;save 2nd printer column

;load 3rd pel
;mask 3rd pel

;load 3rd pel shift
;shift right
;clear upper

;multiply by weight (row)
;save 3rd printer col\llDJl
;load 4th pel
;mask 4th pel

;load 4th pel shift
;shift right
;clear upper

;multiply by weight (row)
;save 4th printer column
;preserve bx
;counter into print buffer
;load column N4
;load column N4+1
;load column N4+2

;load column N4+3

(Colllinued)

68

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

Chap. 2

;

;recall print block row index
;increase print block row counter
;increase byte count
;decrease row bound

pop ex
inc di
add ddd,BO
dee ex

cmp cx,o
jle 00133
jmp 00112

00133:
;add 4 columns to index

add N4,4
dee dx

;decrement row bytes

inc si
cmp dx,o
jle DII2
jmp 00111

;increase screen buffer index

DII2:
ret
ldarray ENDP
;

CSEG

ENDS
END

Figure 2.6b (Co11cludecf)

Figure 2.7a presents a Structure Chart for the modularized boxprtl.asm program. Figure 2.7b presents a modularized version of the earlier boxprtl.asm program. Here all the graphics and print routines have been assembled as separate
modules. Only the large data segment areas are present with the small FAR procedure that actually plots and prints the two lines.
000
PLOT/PRINT
TWO PARALLEL
LINES

100

l

200
ACCESS
SCREEN

SETUP
DATA
AREAS

210

l

LOCK
SCREEN&
SET MODE

300

]
220
PLOT
HORIZONTAL
LINES

J
PRINT
SCREEN

l
230
SAVE
SCREEN
BUFFER

240

J

UNLOCK SCREEN,
HESITATE, AND
RETURN

Figure 2.7a Structure Chart for modularized boxprtl.asm program.

Figure 2.8 iUustrates a module that is used to build GRAPHLIB.LIB, a graphics and print library. This module contains the routines needed by twoln.asm to
develop the two-line output in modular fashion. There is only one difference: In the
twoln.asm program the length of the lines must be specified in the routine lineh.

Sec. 2.3

69

Accessing the Video Services

This was implemented to be 320 columns with the earlier version of lineh. That
version was used with twolin.asm, and we have illustrated the more general lineh in
Figure 2.8 because it is characteristic of what appears in GRAPHLIB.LIB. Here, the
beginning and ending column values must be specified in xb and xe, respectively.

PAGE 55, 132
TITLE TWOLN - This program plots/prints 2 lines (twoln.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This program plots two lines in protected
mode and hesitates using a keyboard delay. Graphics
mode 05H is used to display the lines •
• 8087
EXTRN
I Fl

prtscr:FAR,scr_ld:FAR,cls:FAR,clsCGA:FAR,lineh:FAR
include sysmac.inc

ENDIF
dgroup
STACK

.sall
GROUP

;Suppresses macro lists

data

STACK

SEGMENT PARA STACK 'STACK'
db
256 dup('STACK
')
ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'
Graphics (printer) variables public

PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC

sixforty,N4,ddd,w,bl,scr_buffer

PUBLIC

xx,xxx,tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl,PVBptrl,physell,waitf

PUBLIC

dstat,four,two,col,dummy,MASKl,MASKll,row,eighty,address

PUBLIC

OFFSETl,y,xb,xe

in_buffer,bytesin,bytesout,in_bufferl,bytesinl
in_buffer2,bytesin2,in_buffer3,bytesin3,in_buffer4
dev_name,dev_hand,dev_act,dev_size,dev_attr,dev_flag
dev_mode,dev_rsv,MM,coll,N

s,eight,eighty,four,shiftl

Graphics (screen) variables public

Screen display variables
;

viohdl

equ
dw
equ
tr
dw
le
dw
dw
br
re
dw
no line dw
blank
dw

0
0
0
0
0
23
79
25
0007H

;Required video handle
;Completion code
;Terminates current thread
;Top row screen clear
;Left column screen clear
;Bottom row screen clear
;Right column screen clear
;Number lines scrolled
;Blank character pair

CGAm
label
lmodeE dw
typeCGA db
colCGA db

FAR
12
OOOOOlllB
2
40
25

;Video mode structure-CGA
;structure length
;Mode identifier
;Color option-Mode 5
;text characters/line-ignore
;text lines-ignore

result
action

txtcCGA dw

txtrCGA dw

Figure 2.7b Modularized program twoln.asm.

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

70

hrCGA
vrCGA

dw
dw

;horizontal resolution

320
200

;vertical resolution

STDm
label
lmode80 dw
type80 db
col80
db
txtc80 dw
txtr80 dw
dw
hr80
vrao
dw

FAR
12
000000018
4
80
25
720
400

;Video mode structure-aOx25
;Structure length
;Mode identifier-Mode 3+
;Color option
;text characters/line
;text lines
;horizontal resolution
;vertical resolution

kbd buf db
lkbd buf dw
iowait dw
kbdhdl equ

80
$-kbd_buf
0
0

;Keyboard buffer
;Length keyboard buffer
;Wait for CR
;Keyboard handle

waitf
dstat

1

;Screen waiting status

equ
db

;Returned status

PVBPtrl label
buf stl dd
buflenl dd
physell dw

FAR
OB8000H
4000H
0

;Video buffer structure
;Start physical address
;Buffer length
;OS/2 screen buffer selector

MAS Kl
db
MASKll dw
OFFSETl dw
four
dw
xx
dw
dummy
dw
two
db
xxx
db
eighty dw
row
dw
col
dw
address dw

OlH
OOOlH
2000H
4
7
7
2

;PEL byte mask
;Odd/even row mask
;Odd row buffer offset
;PEL modulo parameter
;80287 dummy "pop"

;Output value
80
;row
;column
;Address screen dot

7

x
y
xb
xe
yb
ye

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

7

eight

dw

8

;Box col parameter
;Box row parameter

;Start column
;End column
;Start row
;End row

75
150
25
175

Data area below is used for screen print routine.

in buffer
bytesin dw
bytesout
in bufferl
bytesinl
in buffer2
bytesin2
in buffer3
bytesin3
in_buffer4

dev name
dev-hand
dev=act

db

:print buffer
:CGA line
;output count
0
1BH,4BH,64D,01H ;printer setup
4
;count bytes In_bufferl
ODH,OAH
;LF/CR
;in_buffer2 byte count
2
1BH,41H,08H
;in_buffer3 byte count
3
1BH,32H

db
dw
dw

'LP'l'l' ,O
0
0

db

320
dw
db
dw
db

dw
db

dw

320 dup(O)

;name of printer device
;device handle

Figure 2.7b (Continued)

Chap. 2

71

Accessing the Video Services

Sec. 2.3

dev size
dev-attr

dd
dw
dw
dw
dd

dev:=flag
dev mode

dev:=rsv
N4

dw
db
db
db
db
dw
db
db
dw
dw
db

MM

w
coll
bl
N
shiftl
s
ddd
sixf orty
scr_buffer

0
0

OOOOOOOlb

?
40H,lOH,04H,OlH ;pel mask
128,64,32,16,8,4,2,1
;pin weights

320 dup(?)
4 dup(?)

;column index-printer

?

;printer line

6,4,2,0
4 dup(?)
?
640
16384 dup(O)

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:cseg,ds:dgroup
PROC
FAR

OS21

;Open File

OOOOOOOOllOOOOOlb
;hdl private,deny none,w/o
o
;reserved

;dup copies pel byte
;temporary buffer--screen values

call els

;Clear screen

@VioSetMode CGAm,viohdl

;set CGA Graphics mode

call clsCGA

;Clear CGA screen

@VioScrLock waitf,dstat,viohdl

;Lock screen context

@VioGetPhysBuf PVBPtrl,viohdl
push physell
pop es

;Get physical buffer selector
;save selector
;Load selector into extra segment

mov ax,o
mov y,ax
call lineh
mov ax,100
mov y,ax
call lineh

;Draw line
;draw second line

call scr_ld
@VioScrUnLock

;loads the temporary buffer
viohdl

;Unlock screen context

@KbdStringin kbd_buf,lkbd_buf,iowait,kbdhdl
@VioSetMode STDm.,viohdl

OS21
CSEG

;hesitate

;BO x 25 alpha mode

call prtscr

;prints temporary buffer

@DosExit action,result

;Terminate process

ENDP
ENDS
END

OS21

Figured 2.7b (Concluded)

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

72

PAGE 55,132
TITLE GRAPHl - This program is part of graphlib.lib(graphl.ASM)
DESCRIPTION: cls,clsCGA,wdor,and lineh routines
.8087
I Fl

include sysmac.inc

END IF
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN

viohdl:WORD,PVBPtrl:FAR,physell:WORD,waitf:WORD
dstat:BYTE,four:WORD,col:WORD,xx:WORD,dummy:WORD
MASKl:BYTE,xxx:BYTE,row:WORD,eighty:WORD,address:WORD
MASKll:WORD,OFFSETl:WORD,y:WORD,xb:WORD,xe:WORD
two:WORD

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'

tr:WORD,lc:WORD,br:WORD,rc:WORD,no_line:WORD,blank:WORD

assume cs:cseg
PUBLIC cls,clsCGA,wdot,lineh

els

PROC

FAR

@VioScrollUp tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl

ret
els

ENDP

clsCGA

PROC

FAR

@VioscrLock waitf,dstat,viohdl

;Lock screen context

@VioGetPhysBuf PVBFtrl,viohdl
push physel1
pop es

;Get physical buffer
;Screen selector
;Load extra segment

mov bp,O

;Start offset zero

mov al,O

;Zero attribute-clear

001:

mov es: [bp) ,al

;Clear byte

inc bp
cmp bp,lFJFH
jle 001

;Check end 1st buffer

mov bp,2000H

mov al,O

;Offset 2nd buffer-odd
;Zero attribute-clear

002:

mov es: [bp] ,al
inc bp
cmp bp,JFJFH
jle 002

;Clear byte

@VioScrUnLcck viohdl

;Unlock screen context

clsCGA

ret
ENDP

wdot

PROC

FAR

(col,row)
fild four

fild col

;Check end 2nd buffer

= (x,y)
;Load stack with 4

;ST = col, ST(l)

Figm·e 2.8 Listing of partial content of GRAPHLIB.LIB.

Chap. 2

Sec. 2.3

73

Accessing the Video Services

fprem

Modulo

fistp xx
fistp dummy

Store remainder in xx
Pop stack

mov al,3
mov bl,byte ptr xx
sub al,bl

;(J - col% 4)

mov ah,O

;Clear upper multiplicand

mul two
mov cl,al
mov al,MASKl
shl al,cl

;Shift value for PEL

mov xxx,al

;PEL color mask
;Shift to correct PEL
;Store buffer value

mov ax,row
shr ax,l
mov dx,o

;Begin address calculation
;Divide row by 2
;Clear upper multiplicand

mul eighty

mov bx,col
shr bx,1

;Convert column value to bytes

shr bx,l
add ax,bx

;offset in ax
;Save offset base
;Check even/odd row
;Look for bit O set

mov address,ax
mov ax,row
and ax,MASKll
cmp ax,o
jle ELSEl

mov ax,address
add ax,OFFSET1
jmp IF11

;add odd buffer offset

ELSE1:

mov ax,address
IF11:

wdot
lineh

mov bp,ax
mov al,xxx

;screen buffer address
;Attribute value for dot

or es:[bp],al

;Write dot

ret
ENDP
PROC

FAR

y = row position, xb

begin, xe = end

mov ax,y
mov row,ax

;Establish row for wdot

mov ax,Xb

;Establish start column

0010:

mov col,ax
push ax
call wdot

pop ax
inc ax
cmp ax,xe

;Save column value
;Write dot (col,row)
;Recall column
;Increment column
;Check end horizontal line

jle 0010
lineh
CSEG

ret
ENDP
ENDS
END

Figure 2.8 (Concluded)

74

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

Chap. 2

2.3.4 Connecting Line Graphics with OS/2

Consider two disjoint points on the screen at coordinates (x0 ,y0) and (x1 ,y 1), respectively. (Assume that xi corresponds to a column value (1,320) and y corresponds to
a row value [1,200].) If we are plotting a dot at these points, it is desirable perhaps
to link two points with a line to show connectivity. Since there may exist pixels on
the screen between these two points, a program could fill in these pixels and the
screen would appear to have a line connecting the two points. To do this, we use
the equation for a straight line:

Yz =Yo+ m(xz-xo)
Here the slope is

m=--We have used y 2 and x 2 as dummy variables to represent the intermediate points in
question.
Unfortunately, the density of dots available on the IBM Color Graphics
Adapter screen is at most 320 x 200 or 640 x 200. Although this seems like a lot
of points, the screen is large and frequently the connecting lines appear jagged. This
is because the slope is effectively quantized. To understand this, consider two points
with slope 0.1 between them. Recognizing that y 2, y 0 , and x 0 are all integers in
Equation (2.1 ), it follows that
Y2 =y0 + (0.1) (x2 -x0 )

Clearly, for y 2 to increase by one pixel on the screen, x2 - x0 must change by 11
pixels in the horizontal direction. Thus the lines appear broken.
Equations (2.1) and (2.2) are the key to developing techniques for plotting
connecting line graphics in the IBM microcomputer context (or any other raster
scanning device, for that matter). Figure 2.9a contains the flowchart for the connecting line program. Figure 2.9b illustrates the procedure CONNL2, which plots connecting lies between the points (XO,YO) and (Xl,Yl) using as dummy variables
(X2,Y2). The remaining variables (NCOUNT, SIGN, and M) are self-explanatory.
The only complex feature of this routine, as it implements Equations (2.1) and (2.2),
is the scaling mechanism. To prevent undue round-off the numerator of the slope is
scaled up by a factor of 100. This is subsequently removed. The sign of the slope
(SIGN) is calculated and used to demarcate the procedure based on positive versus
negative values. The routine wdot is used to plot the connecting line.
Figure 2.10 presents a program, slopeln.asm, that plots a connecting line between the points
and
(x2 , y 2) =(275,175)

Sec. 2.3

75

Accessing the Video Services
PRESERVE
REGISTERS

LOADCONNL2
DATA SEG. ADD.

XO.XSTART
X1 ·XEND
X2-XSTART
YO-YSTART
Y1 ·YEND
Y2-YSTART

GENERATE NUMBER
"CONNECTING" PTS.

CALCULATE
Y1 -YO

N

N

SCALE BY 100:
M = 100 (Y1 - YO)

SCALE BY 100:
M=100(YO-Y1)

CALCULATE
YO+ M (X2-XO)

NEGATIVE
SLOPE

POSITIVE
SLOPE

WRITE DOT AT
X2ANDY2

CALCULATE
M (X2-XO)

CALCULATE
YO - M (X2 - XO)

INCREMENT X2

DIVIDE BY NUMBER
"CONNECTING" PTS.

y

N

y
RETURN
REGISTERS

DIVIDE BY 100 TO
REMOVE SCALING

DIVIDE BY 100 TO
REMOVE SCALING

RETURN

Figure 2.9a Functional flowchart for connecting line routine, conn12.

76

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

PAGE 40,132
TITLE CONNL2- CONNECT LINE AND PLOT (CONNL2.ASM)
DESCRIPTION:This routine reads DX
(YSTART,YEND), BX= XSTART, and ex= XEND.

It generates a connecting line between the
points (XSTART,YSTART) and (XEND,YEND) and
plots the points. The routine as part of the
S/2 graphlib.lib
EXTRN
EXTRN

YO:WORD,Yl:WORD,Y2:WORD,XO:WORD,Xl:WORD,X2:WORD
NCOUNT:WORD,SIGN:WORD,M:WORD,col:WORD,row:WORD

EXTRN

wdot:FAR
Connl2 Variables

YO
Y2
Yl
XO
X2
Xl
NCOUNT
SIGN
M
CLINE
CONNL2

ow
OW
ow
ow
ow
ow
ow
ow
ow

;Y start

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

;Y-value (dynamic)

;Y end
:x start
;X-value (dynamic)
;X end

;Number points in line
;Sign slope
:Scaled partial slope

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
PUBLIC CONNL2
PROC
FAR
ASSUME CS: CLINE
PUSH OS
PUSH AX
PUSH BX
PUSH ex
PUSH DX
PUSH DI
PUSH SI
;Load screen coordinates

MOV AL,DH
MOV AH,0
MOV YO,AX
MOV Y2,AX
MOV AL,DL
MOV AH,O
MOV Yl,AX
MOV XO,BX
MOV X2,BX
MOV Xl,CX

:DH contains YSTART
:Clear top half AX
:Start Y-point
:Also save YSTART in y
;DL contains YEND

:Clear top half AX
;End Y-point

:Start X-point
;Save XSTART in x also

:End X-point

;Generate count index
MOV AX,Xl
SUB AX,XO
MOV NCOUNT,AX

;Larger x-value in increment
;Calculate X-increment

MOV DX,O
MOV AX,Yl
SUB AX,YO

;Clear upper numerator register

;Number of X-points to connect

;Generate slope
;Begin calculation Yl - YO for slope

Figure 2.9b Program code for conn12, the connecting line routine.

Chap. 2

Sec. 2.3

77

Accessing the Video Services

JB ELSEl
MOV CX,100
MOV DX,O
MUL ex
MOV M,AX
MOV AX,1
MOV SIGN,AX
JMP IIFl

;Scale slope by 100

MOV AX,YO
SUB AX,Yl
MOV CX,100
MOV DX,O
MUL ex
MOV M,AX
MOV AX,O
MOV SIGN,AX

;Positive slope

;Clear upper multiplicand register

;Slope in M
;Sign negative for slope

;Sign increment Y-axis points

ELSEl:
;Calculate (Yl - YO)
;Scale by 100
;Clear upper register
;Slope in M
;Positive slope

;Sign deecision Y-axis points

IIFl:
001:
MOV AX,X2
SUB AX,XO
;(X - XO)
MOV DX,O
;Clear upper multiplicand register
MUL M
;Multiply by slope numerator
DIV NCOUNT
;Begin completion slope calculation
MOV CX,100
;Value corresponding to slope 1
;Check
for slope less 1
CMP AX,CX
JB ELSE2
;Jump slope less/= 1
MOV DX,O
;Clear upper register
DIV ex
;Remove scaling
JMP IIF2
ELSE2:
;O slope

MOV AX,O
IIF2:

MOV BX,SIGN
CMP BX,1
;Jump positive slope
JB ELSE3
MOV BX,YO
;Load Y-start value
ADD AX,BX
;Add Mx(X-XO)
JMP IIF3
ELSE3:
MOV BX,YO
SUB BX,AX
MOV AX,BX

;Positive slope

;Generate YO - M x (X - XO)

;save in AX

IIF3:
MOV CX,X2
MOV DX,AX

;X-position

MOV col,CX

;write dot

;Y-position

MOV row,DX
CALL wdot

;OS/2 dot routine

INC X2
MOV BX,X2
CMP BX,Xl
JBE 001

;Next point

;Ck X<= Xl

POP SI
POP DI
POP DX
POP ex
POP BX
POP AX
POP DS
RET

CONNL2

ENDP

CLINE

ENDS
END

CONNL2

Figure 2.9b (Concludecf)

78

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

PAGE 55,132
TITLE SLOPELN - This program plots/prints sloped line (slopeln.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This program plots a sloped line in protected
mode and hesitates using a keyboard delay. Graphics
mode 05H is used to display the lines •
• 8087

EXTRN
I Fl

prtscr:FAR,scr_ld:FAR,cls:FAR,clsCGA:FAR,lineh:FAR,connl2:FAR
include sysmac.inc

END IF
dgroup

.sall
GROUP

;Suppresses macro lists

data

STACK

SEGMENT PARA STACK 'STACK'
db
256 dup( 'STACK
')
ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'

STACK

Graphics (printer) variables public

PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC

in_buffer,bytesin,bytesout,in_bufferl,bytesinl
in_buffer2,bytesin2,in_buffer3,bytesin3,in_buffer4
dev name,dev hand,dev act,dev size,dev attr,dev flag
dev-mode,dev-rsv,MM,0011,N
s,eTght,eighty,four,shiftl,scr_buffer
sixforty,N4,ddd,w,bl

PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC

xx,xxx,tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl,PVBPtrl,physell,waitf
dstat,four,two,col,dummy,MASKl,MASKll,row,eighty,address
OFFSETl,y,xb,xe

PUBLIC

XO,Xl,X2,YO,Yl,Y2,M,NCOUNT,SIGN

XO
Xl
X2
YO

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

Graphics (screen) variables public

Sloped line public variables

Sloped line declarations

Y1

Y2
NCOUNT
SIGN
M

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

;x start
;x end
;dummy x
;y start
;y end
;dummy y
;number points in line
:sign slope
;scaled partial slope

Figure 2.10 The program slopeln.asm, which plots on the screen a connecting
line from (row,col) = (25,25) to (175,275).

Chap. 2

Sec. 2.3

79

Accessing the Video Services

Screen display variables

viohdl equ
result dw
action equ
tr
dw
dw
le
br
dw
re
dw
no line dw
blank
dw
CGAm
label
lmodeE dw
typeCGA db
eolCGA db
txteCGA dw
txtrCGA dw
hr CGA
dw
vrCGA
dw

;Required video handle
;Completion code
;Terminates current thread
;Top row screen clear
;Left column screen clear
;Bottom row screen clear
;Right column screen clear
;Number lines scrolled
;Blank character pair

0
0
0
0
0

23
79
25

0007H
FAR
12
000001118
2

40
25
320
200

STDm
label
lmode80 dw
type80 db
col BO
db
txtc80 dw
txtrao dw
hr Bo
dw
vrso
dw

FAR
12
OOOOOOOlB

kbd buf db
lkbd buf dw
iowait dw
kbdhdl equ

80
$-kbd buf

4

;text lines
;horizontal resolution
;vertical resolution

720

400

-

0

waitf

equ

1

dstat

db

?

;Video mode structure-80x25
;Structure length
;Mode identifier-Mode 3+
;Color option

;text characters/line

80
25

0

;Video mode structure-CGA
;Structure length
;Mode identifier
;Color option-Mode 5
;text characters/line-ignore
;text lines-ignore
;horizontal resolution
;vertical resolution

;Keyboard buffer
;Length keyboard buffer
;Wait for CR
;Keyboard handle
;Screen waiting status
;Returned status

PVBptrl label
buf stl dd
buflenl dd
physell dw

FAR
OBBOOOH
4000H
0

;Buffer length
;OS/2 screen buffer selector

MASKl
MASKll

OlH
OOOlH
2000H

;PEL byte mask
;Odd/even row mask
;Odd row buffer offset

db

dw
OFFSETl dw
four
dw
xx
dw
dummy
dw
two
db
xxx
db
eighty dw
row
dw
col
dw
address dw

x
y

4

?
?

;PEL modulo parameter
; 80287 dummy "pop"

2

?
80

;Output value

?

;row
;column
;Address screen dot

?
?

yb
ye

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

?
?
75
150
25
175

eight

dw

8

xb
xe

;Video buffer structure
;Start physical address

;Box col parameter
;Box row parameter
;Start column

;End column
;Start row
;End row

Figure 2.10 (Continued)

80

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

Data area below is used for screen print routine.

in buffer
by"tesin dw
bytesout
in bufferl
bytesinl
in buff er2

byt'esin2

db
320
dw
db
dw
db
dw

in buff er3
bytesin3

db

in_buf fer4

db

dev name
dev-hand
dev-act
dev-size
dev-attr
dev:::nag
dev_mode
dev_rsv

db

dw

dw
dw
dd
dw
dw
dw
dd

N4

dw

MM

db

w
coll
bl
N
shiftl
s
ddd
sixforty
scr_buffer

db
db

db
dw
db
db
dw
dw
db

320 dup(O)
0
1BH,4BH,64D,01H
4
ODH,OAH
2
1BH,41H,08H
3
lBH, 32H

;in_buffer3 byte count

'LPTl I, 0
;name of printer device
0
;device handle
0
0
0
OOOOOOOlb
;Open File
0000000011000001b
;hdl private,deny none,w/o
a
;reserved

?
40H, lOH, 04H, OlH ;pel mask
128,64,32,16,S,4,2,l
;pin weights
320 dup(?)
;column index-printer
4 dup(?)
?
;printer line
6,4,2,0
4 dup(?)
;dup copies pel byte
?
640
16384 dup(O)
;temporary buffer--screen values

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:cseg,ds:dgroup
PROC
FAR

OS21

;print buffer
;CGA line
;output count
;printer setup
;count bytes In_bufferl
;LF/CR
;in_buffer2 byte count

call els

;Clear screen

@VioSetMode CGAm,viohdl

;Set CGA Graphics mode

call clsCGA

;Clear CGA screen

@VioScrLock waitf,dstat,viohdl

;Lock screen context

@VioGetPhysBuf PVBptrl,viohdl
push physell
pop es

;Get physical buffer selector
;Save selector
;Load selector into extra segment

mov dh,25
mov dl,175
mov bx,25
call connl2

;y-begin
;y-end
;x-begin
;x-end
;plot sloped line

call scr_ld

;loads the temporary buffer

mov cx,275

Figure 2.10 (Continued)

Chap. 2

Sec. 2.3

81

Accessing the Video Services

@VioScrUnLock

viohdl

;Unlock screen context

@KbdStringin kbd_buf,lkbd_buf,iowait,kbdhdl

OS21
CSEG

;hesitate

@VioSetMode STDm,viohdl

;SO x 25 alpha mode

call prtscr

;prints temporary buffer

@DosExit action,result

;Terminate process

ENDP
ENDS
END

OS21

Figure 2.10 (Concluded)

This program calls conn12 to plot the line on the screen in the usual fashion. Note
that the assembler is case insensitive. Next the print of the graphics screen is accomplished. The nine variables needed by the connecting line module, conn12, are
declared public and specified in the data segment of slopeln.asm. Figure 2.11 illustrates the sloped-line output.

·-·--·--·--·--·--·-·--·----...

--,
Figure 2.11 Screen dump of sloped connecting line from slopeln.asm.

Figure 2.12 illustrates a procedure bboxl.asm that plots a box based on general parameter inputs: (xb,yb) and (xe,ye) being the opposite corners of the box,
with the first the upper left side and the second the lower right side. Figure 2.13 is
the procedure linev, which is the corollary to lineh, and this procedure plots avertical line. Figure 2.14 contains the contents of the library module GRAPHLIB.LIB.
This module has all the graphics primitives and graphics printer screen dump
modules.

82

Chap. 2

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

PAGE 55,132
TITLE BBOXl - This is the boxx module (bboxl.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This module generates a box in protected
It contains a procedures: boxx

mode.
.8087

EXTRN
EXTRN

y:WORD,yb:WORD,ye:WORD,x:WORO,xb:WORD,xe:WORD,lineh:FAR
row:WORD,col:WORO,wdot:FAR,linev:FAR

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:cseg
PUBLIC boxx

boxx

FAR

PROC

xb = x-begin,xe = x-end,yb = y-begin,ye = y-end

mov ax,yb
mov y,ax

;Top box line

call lineh

;Draw top horizontal line
;Bottom box line

mov ax,ye
mov y,ax

boxx
CSEG

call lineh

;Draw bottom horizontal line

mov ax,xb
mov x,ax
call linev
mov ax,xe
mov x,ax
call linev

;Left box line

;Draw left vertical line
;Right box line
;Draw right vertical line

ret
ENDP
ENDS
END

boxx

Figure 2.12 Routine bboxl.asm, which plots box and contains procedure boxx.

Finally, Figure 2.15 illustrates a program that exercises boxx, the procedure for
plotting a box based on the module bboxl.asm. This program is called bbox.asm
and links as follows:
[c:\)]

link bbox

IBM Linker/2
Copyright(c)
Copyright(c)

Version 1. 00
IBM Corporation 1987
Microsoft Corp 1983-1987.

Run File [BBOX.EXE]:
List Files (NOL.MAP):
Libraries [.LIB]: doscalls + graphlib
Definitions File [NOL.DEF]:

All

rights

reserved.

Sec. 2.3

83

Accessing the Video SeNices

PAGE 55,132
TITLE LLINEV - This is the linev module (llinev.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This module generates a vertical line in protected
It contains a procedure: linev

mode.

.8087
EXTRN
EXTRN

y:WORD,yb:WORD,ye:WORD,x:WORD,xb:WORD,xe:WORD
row:WORD,col:WORD,wdot:FAR

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:cseg
PUBLIC linev

linev

PROC

FAR

x = col position, yb

begin, ye = end

mov ax,x
mov col,ax

;Establish column for wdot

mov ax,yb

;Establish start row

0020:

mov row,ax
push ax
call wdot
pop ax

;Save row value
;Write dot (col,row)
;Recall row
;Increment row
;Check end vertical line

inc ax
cmp ax,ye

jle 0020
linev
CSEG

ret
ENDP
ENDS
END

linev

Figure 2.13 Vertical line procedure, linev.

BOXX •.••••.••••••• bboxl
CLSCGA •••.••••.••• graphl
LINEV ............. 11 inev
SCR_LD ••••.•••.••• scrld

CLS •••••••.••••••• graphl
LINEH ••.•••••.•••• graphl
PRTSCR •••••••••••• prtscr
WOOT •••••••••••••• graphl

Offset: OOOOOOlOH

Code and data size: 29H

Offset: OOOOOOaOH

Code and data size: 233H

bboxl
BOXX

Offset: 000006bOH

Code and data size: 2dH

llinev

Offset: 000007b0H

Code and data size: lbH

Offset: 00000870H
CLSCGA

Code and data size: l04H

scrld

SCR_LD
prtscr

PRTSCR

LIN EV
graphl
CLS

LINEH

WOOT

Figure 2.14 Listing of GRAPHLIB.LIB, illustrating the screen graphics and
screen print routines.

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

84

Chap. 2

PAGE 55,132
TITLE BBOX - This program plots/prints a box using modules (bbox.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This program plots a box in protected
mode and hesitates using a keyboard delay. Graphics
mode 05H is used to display the lines •

• 8087
EXTRN
I Fl

prtscr:FAR,scr_ld:FAR,cls:FAR,clsCGA:FAR,boxx:FAR
include sysmac.inc

ENDIF
dgroup
STACK

.sall
GROUP

;Suppresses macro lists

data

STACK

SEGMENT PARA STACK 'STACK'
db
256 dup( 'STACK
')
ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'
Graphics (printer) variables public

PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC

in_buffer,bytesin,bytesout,in_bufferl,bytesinl
in_buffer2,bytesin2,in_buffer3,bytesin3,in_buffer4
dev name,dev hand,dev act,dev size,dev attr,dev flag

PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC

xx,xxx,tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl,PVBFtrl,physell,waitf
dstat,four,two,col,dummy,MASKl,MASKll,row,eighty,address
OFFSETl,y,xb,xe,x,yb,ye

dev-mode,dev-rsv,MM,c011,N

-

-

-

s,eTght,eighty,four,shiftl,scr_buffer
sixforty,N4,ddd,w,bl

Graphics (screen) variables public

screen display variables

viohdl equ
result dw
action equ
tr
dw
le
dw
dw
br
re
dw
no line dw
dw
blank

0
0
0
0
0
23
79
25
0007H

;Required video handle
;Completion code
;Terminates current thread
;Top row screen clear
;Left column screen clear
;Bottom row screen clear
;Right column screen clear
;Number lines scrolled
;Blank character pair

label
CGAm
lmodeE dw
typeCGA db
colCGA db
txtcCGA dw
txtrCGA dw
hrCGA
dw
vrCGA
dw

FAR
12
OOOOOlllB
2
40
25
320
200

;Video mode structure-CGA
;Structure length
;Mode identifier
;Color option-Mode 5
;text characters/line-ignore
;text lines-ignore
;horizontal resolution
;vertical resolution

Figure 2.15 Program that graphs box on screen and then dumps output to printer.

Sec. 2.3

85

Accessing the Video Services

STDm
label
lmode80 dw
type80 db
col80
db
txtc80 dw
txtr80 dw
hr80
dw
vr80
dw

FAR
12
000000018
4
80
25
720
400

;Color option
;text characters/line

kbd buf db
lkbd buf dw
iowait dw
kbdhdl equ

80
$-kbd_buf
0
0

;Keyboard buffer
;Length keyboard buff er
;Wait for CR
;Keyboard handle

;
waitf

equ

1

dstat

db

;Screen waiting status
;Returned status

PVBPtrl label
buf stl dd
buflenl dd
physell dw

FAR
OB8000H
4000H
0

;Video buffer structure
;Start physical address

MAS Kl
db
MASKll dw
OFFSETl dw
four
dw
dw
xx
dummy
dw
two
db
xxx
db
eighty dw
row
dw
col
dw
address dw

OlH
OOOlH
2000H
4

x
y

;Video mode structure-80x25
;structure lenqth

;Mode identifier-Mode 3+
;text lines
;horizontal resolution

;vertical resolution

;Buffer length
;OS/2 screen buff er selector
;PEL byte mask
;Odd/even row mask
;Odd row buffer offset

;PEL modulo parameter

7
7

; 80287 dummy

11

pop 11

2
7

;output value

80
;row
;column

7
7
7

;Address screen dot

?
7

;Box col parameter
;Box row parameter

xe
yb
ye

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

75
150
25
175

;Start column
;End column
;Start row
;End row

eight

dw

8

xb

Data area below is used for screen print routine.

in buffer
bytesin dw
bytesout
in bufferl
bytesinl
in buffer2
bytesin2
in buffer3
bytesinJ

db

320 dup(O)

320
dw

0

db

dw

;CGA line
;output count
1BH,4BH,64D,01H ;printer setup
;count bytes In_bufferl
4

db

ODH,OAH

;LF/CR

dw

2
1BH,41H,08H
3
lBH, 32H

;in_buffer2 byte count

db

dw

in_buffer4

db

dev name
dev-hand

db

1

dw
dw
dd
dw

0
0
0
0

dev-act
dev-size

dev:::attr

;print buffer

LPT1 1 , 0

; in_buffer3 byte count
;name of printer device
;device handle

Figure 2.15 (Continued)

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

86

dev_flag

dw
dw
dd

dev mode

dev=:rsv
N4

dw
db

MM

w
coll
bl
N
shiftl
s
ddd

db

sixforty

db
db
dw
db
db
dw
dw

scr_buffer

db

OOOOOOOlb

;Open File
;hdl private,deny none,w/o
;reserved

OOOOOOOOllOOOOOlb

o

?
40H,lOH,04H,OlH ;pel mask
128,64,32,16,8,4,2,1
;pin weights
320 dup(?)
;column index-printer
4 dup(?)

?

;printer line

6,4,2,0

4 dup(?)
?
640
16384 dup(O)

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:cseg,ds:dqroup
PROC
FAR

OS21

;dup copies pel byte
;temporary buffer--screen values

call els

;Clear screen

@ViosetMode CGAm,viohdl

;Set CGA Graphics mode

call clsCGA

;Clear CGA screen

@VioscrLock waitf ,dstat,viohdl

;Lock screen context

@VioGetPhysBuf PVBPtrl,viohdl
push physell
pop es

;Save selector
;Load selector into extra segment

call boxx

;generate box

call scr_ld
@VioScrUnLock

;Get physical buffer selector

;loads the temporary buffer

viohdl

;Unlock screen context

@KbdStrinqin kbd_buf,lkbd_buf,iowait,kbdhdl

OS21
CSEG

;hesitate

@VioSetMode STDm,viohdl

;80 x 25 alpha mode

call prtscr

;prints temporary buffer

@DosExit action,result

;Terminate process

ENDP
ENDS
END

Chap. 2

OS21

Figure 2.15 (Concluded)

Figure 2.16 presents the output for the box. It assumes the following corner values
based on the data segment specification:
(xb, yb) = (75,25)

and
(xe, ye) = (150,175)

It is important to recognize that the method for accessing the OS/2 physical

Sec. 2.4

87

Software Design

display buffer is initially cumbersome since the display context must first be locked.
Good programming practice, however, would implement this step only once during
execution of a given process or thread. Then full-screen DMA is permitted. Although the advantage of using multitasked display contexts under OS/2, for example,
is lost, the programmer still has access to the very large address space provided by
OS/2.

I

l

Figure 2.16 Box screen print from
bbox.asm (Figure 2.15).

It is the benefits of multitasking and memory access that highlight OS/2's
attributes. If animation or rapid update of the screen context is needed, the application must be structured to maximize its screen access while continuing to take
advantage of other task-sharing arrangements and memory requirements in a multitasking environment.

2.4 SOFTWARE DESIGN
No introductory programming discussion would be complete without mentioning
software design techniques. Three principals come to mind:
1. Modular code
2. Top-down design
3. Structured programming
These form the foundation for developing optimized computer programs [6,7].
We have seen examples of the use of modular code in the examples presented
so far. Basically, programs have been developed on existing independent smaller
modules (such as prtscr, bbox, lineh, linev, ... ).These modules may be linked as
separately assembled (in this case) routines or appear in libraries. The entire notion
of the API embodies a modular approach to handling system services.
Top-down design is somewhat straightforward and starts with a high-level
statement of the problem to be solved. From this approach a flowchart can be

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

88

Chap. 2

developed or, alternatively, a written language rendition of what the program will
accomplish. These two approaches lead naturally into program development. It is not
the intention of this book to teach design fundamentals; hence we will usually
confine ourselves to the actual code implemented in each instance. It is assumed that
the reader can generate design artifacts in either flowchart format or pseudo-code.
General guidelines tend to suggest flowcharts when program dynamics are particularly important. As size becomes a factor, the interfaces tend to dominate programming considerations and pseudo-code becomes desirable.
Finally, we mentioned structured programming. Assembler is intrinsically
unstructured because of the conditional and unconditional jump instructions. Guidelines exist, however, that permit structured techniques with assembly language and
very understandable code results [8,9). As Martin points out (reference 6), an excellent starting point for top-down design is the development of a structure chart that
links each module in static fashion. Structured code accomplishes similar design
tasks by forcing the designer to limit access to each module. Parameter passing becomes very orderly and the variables used within a module are maintained locally
except for those passed externally. The flow of execution is orderly and downward
avoiding unrestrained jumps within the code. In BASIC and C, for example, the
goto instruction is avoided. Entry points are accessed in traceable fashion. We will
discuss C programming in a subsequent chapter, and the syntax of the language
naturally lends itself to structured code. In assembly language the use of syntax of
the form
cmp ax,parm
jle ELSEl

jmp IIFl
ELSEl:

IIFl:

implements the familiar IF ...THEN... ELSE ... structure. Note the use of unconditional jumps to do this. The reader must, of course, recognize that any decision logic
in a higher-level language results in conditional or unconditional jumps at the assembler or machine code level. The fact that we can structure such an assembler, however, yields significant improvement in clarity and understanding.

2.5 SUMMARY
The goal of this chapter was to introduce assembler programming for OS/2 with a
particular emphasis on the techniques needed to access the Application Program
Interface. It was the use API services, as demonstrated through specific examples,
that we intended to emphasize. We developed examples of printer and display access within the API context. A set of program modules was written that allow the

89

Problems

user to obtain a screen dump for the CGA graphics screen. This is similar to the familiar DOS GRAPHICS.COM routine except that they are not terminate and stay
resident (TSR) programs but must be called as active program modules. Similarly,
they must be linked to the user program either as stand-alone modules or from the
library GRAPHLIB.LIB established in the chapter.
It is clear from the chapter that the API must be accessed in more structured
fashion than the normal interrupt call, where free access to the general-purpose
registers is permitted. The advantages of accessing memory above 1 MB are provided by OS/2, and the API architecture is a consequence of this process. Also, the
features of multitasking require a Protected Mode structure. Hence these two aspects
of programming with Intel hardware such as the 80286 cause programming structures such as the API to become essential. This, then, is the justification for learning the API and using OS/2. Eventually, when the programming applications reach
a size where only OS/2 can offer the memory allocation or severe multitasking
constraints are placed on the user, DOS will inevitably be replaced by OS/2. Thus
the programming techniques of this chapter are the beginning approaches to learning how to manage IBM's next-generation microcomputer operating system.

REFERENCES
1. Iacobucci, E., OS/2 Programmer's Guide, Osborne McGraw-Hill, Berkeley, CA, 1988.
2. Letwin, G., Inside OS/2, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1988.
3. Operating System/2 Programmer's Toolkit, Programmer's Guide, International Business
Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1987.
4. IBM Macro Assembler/2, Language Reference and Fundamentals, International Business
Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1987.
5. EPSON FX-85 and FX-185 Printers User's Manual, Seiko Epson Corporation, Nagano,
Japan, 1985.
6. Martin, J., and McClure, C., Structured Techniques for Computing, Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1985.
7. Alagic', S., and Arbib, M. A., The Design of Well-Structured and Correct Programs,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1978.
8. Scanlon, L., IBM PC and XT Assembly Language, Brady Communications Company,
Inc., New York, Chap. 11, 1985.
9. Godfrey, J. T., IBM Microcomputer Assembly Language: Beginning to
Advanced, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989.

PROBLEMS
2.1 Output of a character in the printer graphics mode causes the pins in the print head to
fire, depending on the value of the character (0-255). Which pins fire for the Epson

90

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

Chap. 2

FX-85 for the following values: (a) 174; (b) 203; (c) 85? Assume that the top pin
is number 8.
2.2 The macro call
@VioGetPhysBuf

PVBPrtl,rsv

is an example of the OS/2 access to the physical buffer selector (contained in the
structure PVBPrtl). If the calling sequence for VIOGETPHYSBUF, the API routine, is
given by
EXTRN

VioGetPhysBuf:FAR

PUSH@
PUSH
CALL

Label Data structure
word reserved
VIOGETPHYSBUF

(PVBPrtl)

write a macro to achieve the call indicated above. Use the macros defined in the chapter: @define, @pushw, and @pushs.
2.3 As in Problem 2.2, if the macro @VioScrLock has the calling sequence
EXTRN

VioScrLock:FAR

PUSH
PUSH@
PUSH
CALL

word
waitflag
BYTE
status
word
handle
VIOSCRLOCK

define a macro to achieve the call using the macros defined in the chapter: @define,
@pushw, and @pushs.
2.4 The EGA graphics on the IBM Monochrome Display is a 640 x 350 graphics mode
(ModeHexF). The first eight pixels on the screen are defined by the contents of
memory in location AOOOOH. The screen buffer is mapped into two planes (MapO and
Map2). Assume that only MapO is specified (a default value of white on the normal
background) and this subtends the first 28,000 bytes at AOOOOH. If each bit corresponds to 0 (black) or l(white), what changes would be needed to the programs in
this chapter to allow the code to properly access the EGA screen buffer?
2.5 Write a code fragment that generates the note C (5000 Hz) for 1 second.
2.6 Write a code fragment that plots a straight line from (row, col) =(25,75) to (165,235).
Use conn12.
2.7 Write a code fragment that beeps the speaker for 5 seconds (1000 Hz) following the
striking of a key on the keyboard.
2.8 Is it possible to program OS/2 using simply the OS/2 supplied by IBM? Explain.
2.9 When accessing the physical screen buffer, a segment selector was obtained using
VioGetPhysBuf. This selector was pushed and popped into es, the extra segment register. Screen buffer address locations were then accessed using, for example, a segment
override:
es:

[bp]

91

Problems

where bp was the offset in the screen buffer. What key assumption permits this addressing scheme, and how is it implemented?
2.10 Structure labels used by the API Toolkit services represent FAR or NEAR locations? Why?
2.11 A structure chart lays out the hierarchy of control for a program. Consider a structure chart that calculates a Gaussian random array and plots it on the screen. What
deficiency exists in this presentation assuming that the functional characteristics of
each block are accurate and complete?
000

PLOT RANDOM
ARRAY

100

l

200

l
1

l
300

PLOT
ARRAY

GENERATE
ARRAY

INPUT
SEED

1

l

1

l

230

220

210

SET
NUMBER
SCALING

GENERATE
RANDOM

PRODUCE
GAUSSIAN

310

l

SCREEN
PRESENTATION

2.12 In ordinary printing the line spacing is 1/6 inch. The command
ESC

A

(n)

produces a line spacing of n/72 of an inch. What command is needed in prtscr to
return the printer to normal spacing?
2.13 A key aspect of OS/2 programming is that the device driver Interrupt Service Routine (JSR) is the only type of program authorized to receive hardware interrupts.
Each device driver can have an JSR to process the device interrupts. When the interrupt routine is given control, it has access to the GDT but not any specific LDT.
The routines must rely on the DevHlp services to access application buffers. These
routines run at the highest level of the kernel mode. Are they preemptable by OS/2
task switches? Explain.
2.14 Explain why scr_ld must be called with the screen locked and why prtscr should not
be called with the screen locked.
2.15 When drawing a line segment from
(row,column) = (10,10)
to
(row,column)

=(20,110)

92

Introductory OS/2 Assembler Programming

Chap. 2

how many small straight-line raster segments will be visible in the actual plotted
line?
2.16 DosExitCritSec executes after DosEnterCritSec and reenables thread switching for
the current process. A count of the number of outstanding DosEnterCritSec requests
is maintained. When are these functions likely to be used?
2.17 Observe that DosExit is used only at the conclusion of the main calling module.
What are the criteria for this exit, and how should other modules be terminated?

3 Memory Management
and Multitasking
with Assembler

OS/2 is first and foremost a multitasking and memory management operating system. It was developed around the Intel 80286 Protected Mode hardware implementation and employs the features of this hardware, such as segment selector protection
mechanisms, to achieve multitasking operation. The goal of this chapter is to acquaint the reader with these features of OS/2 in an assembler programming environment.
3.1 MEMORY MANAGEMENT AND MULTITASKING

Memory management and multitasking represent static and dynamic aspects of
programming and are intimately tied to the protection mechanisms of the 80286 for
the OS/2 environment. The 80286 has three basic protection aspects:

1. Isolation of system software from end-user applications
2. Isolation of users from each other
3. Data-type checking
In terms of a ringed picture, the 80286 provides a four-level increasingly privileged
protection mechanism that isolates applications from the various layers of system

93

94

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

software. To understand protection on the 80286, we must begin with its basic parts:
segments and tasks. It is interesting that this division leads naturally into memory
management and multitasking. Both are interrelated as pointed out above and yield
a full Protected Mode picture.
The following illustrates a complete 80286, descriptor cache register (as we
have seen in Chapter 1):
Selectors

115

0147

Segment Register

Access
Rights

Program Visible
(loaded by program)

I

40139

ol

16115

Segment Base
Address
Program Invisible
(loaded by CPU)

Segment Size

The important features of this register that should be recognized are that in the
invisible portion of the register both the access rights byte (with segment type and
privilege level) and size are used to determine protection priority and the segment
base address confirms that the selected segment is valid. Hence a hardware implementation is used to restrict segment access.
By way of review, dynamically each task consists of up to four active segments (with segment registers CS, SS, DS, and ES), as we have seen. The methodology above is used to control segment protection, and since the hardware can
dynamically check protection data, this extends into the task realm. The protection
data are used at two different times dynamically: upon loading a segment register
and upon each reference to the selected segment. Each task can address up to a gigabyte (2 14-2 segments of up to 65,536 bytes) of virtual memory defined by the
task's LDT and the system GDT. The task's private address space (LDT) can occupy up to one-half this memory. The rest is defined by the GDT. The CPU has a
set of base and limit registers that point to the GDT and the LDT of the currently
running task. These registers exist for CS, SS, DS, and ES as defined for the task.
An active task can only load selectors that reference segments defined by its LDT
descriptors or the GDT. Since a task cannot reference descriptors in other LDTs,
protection violations cannot occur.
All descriptor tables have a limit used by the protection hardware to ensure
that correct address space size allocation occurs. This ensures that separation of tasks
takes place. The third ingredient in this protection mechanism is the implementation
of privilege-level checks based on the access rights byte assigned privilege level.
The 80286 privilege-levels are:
1. Level 0: The kernel (most trusted) includes memory management, task isolation, multitasking, intertask communication, and 1/0 resource control.
2. Level 1: System Services (next most trusted level) provides high-level func-

Sec. 3.1

Memory Management and Multitasking

95

tions such as file access scheduling, character 1/0, data communications, and
resource allocation.
3. Level 2: Custom Extensions (third most trusted level) allows standard sys
tern software to be customized: database managers, logical file access services,
and so on.
4. Level 3: Applications (least trusted) include normal programming environment.
It is important to recognize the protection intrinsic to this hierarchy. Functions
catastrophic to system failure are more tightly protected. This ensures that tasking
can continue to execute in the event of single-task failures. Descriptor privilege,
including code segment privilege, is assigned when the descriptor is created. The
system designer assigns privilege directly when the system is constructed or indirectly using a loader. This is how OS/2 functions. OS/2 was designed with appropriate access byte values associated with the kernel and each system service segment. The linker (and loader) assign privilege at a higher level (less trusted) to all
applications software subsequently developed. The programmer does not normally
have access to this privilege specification, and we will not tamper with this mechanism. These are, however, the techniques used by OS/2 to provide memory management and multitasking protection (segment base checking, limit checks, and access
rights byte validation).
Task privilege is dynamic and can change only when control transfers from
one code segment to another. Descriptor privilege, including code segment privilege,
is assigned when the descriptor is created. Clearly, as a task executes, the privilege
level of the task must correspond to that of the code segment currently executing.
Hence such privilege is dynamic. Several general rules apply:
1. Data access is restricted to those segments whose privilege level is the same
or less privileged (numerically greater) than the current privilege level (CPL).
2. Direct code access is restricted to code segments of equal privilege.
3. A gate is required for access to code at more privileged levels.
A gate is a control descriptor consisting of four words. It is used to redirect execution to a different segment at a more privileged level. These call gate descriptors are
used by control instructions (call and jump instructions) in much the same fashion
as segment descriptors are used during normal transfer of code segments at the same
level.
Above, we have briefly examined the background for memory management
and multitasking. Here the emphasis has been on hardware features and privileged
access (and summarizes the discussion of protection in Chapter 1). It is important
to recognize that these are hardware features in the Intel chips. Multitasking and
dynamic memory allocation are particularly well suited to the Intel segmented
memory [1]. CPUs with less protection, such as simple system and user privilege,
are less ideally suited for protection during multitasking [2].

96

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

3.2 MEMORY MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

This section is intended to illustrate simple programming concepts related to
memory management. Under OS/2 the management of memory is accomplished
dynamically using the API calls. These calls all execute primarily at level 0 and
permit memory management of higher-level code, such as applications developed by
the user.
3.2.1 Creating and Accessing Memory Segments

The simplest activity associated with memory management is the creation, access,
and destruction of a memory segment. The code associated with accomplishing this
action is represented as follows:

msize dw (size in bytes of segment)
msell dw ?
mflag dw OOOOOOOOOOOOOlllB ~sharable,
@DosAllocSeg msize,

msell,

discardable

mflag

@DosFreeSeg msell

Figure 3.1 illustrates the program twolnm.asm, a modified version of the
module twoln.asm. This program creates a temporary buffer in place of scr_buffer
(the buffer used earlier) and uses the representative code shown above to accomplish this action. The parameter msize has been specified to be 16,384 bytes, the
buffer size for the screen buffer. A selector, msell, is obtained from the call to
@DosAllocSeg, and the specified flag indicates that the selector's segment is sharable among code segments other than the one creating the segment, and may be discarded. Finally, once the print screen function is performed, the segment is discarded
using the @DosFreeSeg call.
Figure 3.2 contains the code for scr_ldm, a modified version of scr_ld. Since
the physical screen buffer segment must be accessed using ES (based on selector
physell) and the newly created temporary buffer (using the selector msell), the extra
segment must share its usage between these two selected segments. To accomplish
this, es is pushed after each reference to the physical screen buffer, loaded with
msell, and then used to access the temporary buffer. Following this action, the
physical screen buffer is popped back into es and another access of this buffer
accomplished. Intermediate buffer values are passed using AX. (Note: We use upper
and lowercase references to the 80286 registers in interchangeable fashion.)
Figure 3.3 provides the program for the module prtscrm, a modified version of
prtscr. The only change in this routine is the earlier access to scr_buffer:

Sec. 3.2

97

Memory Management Activities

PAGE 55,132
TITLE TWOLllM - This program plots/prints 2 lines (twolnm.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This program plots two lines in protected
mode and hesitates using a keyboard delay. Graphics
mode 05H is used to display the lines.
The routine uses DYNAMIC MEMORY ALLOCATION •
• 8087
EXTRN
I Fl

prtscrm:FAR,scr_ldm:FAR,cls:FAR,clsCGA:FAR,lineh:FAR
include sysmac.inc

END IF
dgroup
STACK

.sall
GROUP

;Suppresses macro lists

data

STACK

SEGMENT PARA STACK 'STACK'
db
256 dup( 'STACK
')
ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'
Graphics (printer) variables public

PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
.PUBLIC

in_buffer,bytesin,bytesout,in_bufferl,bytesinl
in_buffer2,bytesin2,in_buffer3,bytesin3,in_buffer4
dev_name,dev_hand,dev_act,dev_size,dev_attr,dev_flaq
dev_mode,dev_rsv,MM,coll,N
s,eight,eighty,four,shiftl
sixforty,N4,ddd,w,bl

Graphics (screen) variables public
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC

x:x,xxx,tr;lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl,PVBptrl,physell,waitf
dstat,four,two,col,dummy,MASKl,MASKll,row,eiqhty,address
OFFSETl,y,xb,xe

Dynamic Memory Allocation
PUBLIC

msell

Screen display variables
;

viohdl
result

;Required video handle
;Completion code

equ
dw
equ
tr
dw
dw
le
dw
br
re
dw
no line dw
blank
dw

0
0
0
0
0
23
79
25
0007H

;Top row screen clear
;Left column screen clear
;Bottom. row screen clear
;Right column screen clear
;Number lines scrolled
;Blank character pair

CGAm
label
lmodeE dw
typeCGA db

FAR
12
000001118

;Structure length
;Mode identifier

action

;Terminates current thread

;Video mode structure-CGA

Figure 3.1 The program twolnm.asm (a modified version of twoln.asm), which
creates a buffer for the screen memory.

98

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

;Color option-Mode 5
;text characters/line-ignore
;text lines-ignore
;horizontal resolution
;vertical resolution

colCGA db
txtcCGA dw
txtrCGA dw
dw
hrCGA
vrCGA
dw

2
40
25
320
200

STDm
label
lmode80 dw
type80 db
col80
db
txtc80 dw
txtr80 dw
hr80
dw
vr80
dw

FAR
12
000000018
4
80
25
720
400

kbd_buf db
lkbd buf dw
iowait dw
kbdhdl equ

80
$-kbd_buf
0
0

;Keyboard buffer
;Length keyboard buffer
;Wait for CR
;Keyboard handle

;Video mode structure-80x25

;Structure length
;Mode identifier-Mode 3+
;Color option
;text characters/line
;text lines

;horizontal resolution
;vertical resolution

;

1

;Screen waiting status

?

;Returned status

PVBPtrl label
bufstl dd
buflenl dd
physell dw

FAR
OB8000H
4000H
0

;Video buffer structure
;Start physical address
;Buffer length
;OS/2 screen buffer selector

MAS Kl
db
MASKll dw
OFFSETl dw
four
dw
xx
dw
dummy
dw
two
db
xxx
db
eighty dw
dw
row
col
dw
address dw

OlH
OOOlH
2000H
4

;PEL byte mask
;Odd/even row mask
;Odd row buffer offset

?
?

;PEL modulo parameter

x

?
?

xe
yb
ye

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

eight

dw

8

waitf
dstat

y
xb

equ
db

; 80287 dummy "pop"

2
;Output value

?

80
?
?
?

;row

;column
;Address screen dot
;Box col parameter

;Box row parameter
;Start column
;End column
;Start row
;End row

0
319
25
175

Data area below is used for screen print routine.
;

in buffer
bytesin dw
bytes out
in bufferl
bytesinl
in buffer2
bytesin2
in buffer3
bytesin3
in_buffer4

db
320
dw
db
dw
db
dw
db
dw
db

;print buffer
;CGA line
;output count
0
1BH,4BH,64D,01H ;printer setup
;count bytes In_bufferl
4
ODH,OAH
;LF/CR
;in_buffer2 byte count
2
1BH,41H,08H
; in_buffer3 byte count
3
1BH,32H

320 dup(O)

Figure 3.1 (Continued)

Chap. 3

99

Memory Management Activities

Sec. 3.2

dev name
dev:hand
dev act
dev-size
dev-attr
dev:::flaq
dev mode
dev:rsv

db
dw
dw
dd
dw
dw
dw
dd

N4
MM

dw
db
db
db
db
dw

?
40H,lOH,04H,OlH ;pel mask
128,64,32,16,B,4,2,1
;pin weights

db

6,4,2,0
4 dup(?)
?
640

w
coll
bl
N

shiftl
s
ddd
sixforty

db
dw
dw

msize
msell
mflaq

dw
dw
dw

'LPTl',O

;name of printer device

o

;device handle

0
0
0

OOOOOOOlb
;Open File
OOOOOOOOllOOOOOlb
;hdl private,deny none,w/o
O
;reserved

320 dup(?)
4 dup(?)

;column index-printer

?

;printer line
;dup copies pel byte

Data area below used for dynamic memory allocation
16384

;temporary buffer-screen values
;allocated selector
OOOOOOOOOOOOOlllB
;segment sharable, discardable

?

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:cseg,ds:dgroup
PROC
FAR

OS21

call els

;Clear screen

@VioSetMode CGAm,viohdl

;Set CGA Graphics mode

call clsCGA

;Clear CGA screen

@VioScrLock waitf,dstat,viohdl

;Lock screen context

@VioGetPhysBuf PVBptrl,viohdl
push physell
pop es

;Get physical buffer selector
;Save selector
;Load selector into extra segment

mov ax,o
mov y,ax
;Draw line

call lineh
mov ax,100

mov y,ax
call lineh

;draw second line

@DosAllocSeg msize,msell,mflaq

;allocate temporary buffer

call scr_ldm

;loads the temporary buffer

@VioScrUnLock

viohdl

;Unlock screen context

@KbdStrinqin kbd_buf,lkbd_buf,iowait,kbdhdl

;hesitate

@VioSetMode STDm,viohdl

;SO x 25 alpha mode

call prtscrm

;prints temporary buffer

Figure 3.1 (Continued)

100

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

OS2l
CSEG

@DosFreeSeg msell

;free allocated space

@DosExit action,result

;Terminate process

ENDP
ENDS
END

Chap. 3

OS21

Figure 3.1 (Conclude<!)

PAGE 55,132
TITLE SCRLDM -- This routine loads the screen print buffer (scrldm.asm)
DESCRIPTION:

This routine accompanies prtscr to load

and print the screen in 320 x 200 mode.

The prtscr buffers are assumed loaded. This is an OS/2
routine. This routine uses DYNAMIC MEMORY ALLOCATION through msell.
EXTRN

msell:WORD
.sall

CSEG
SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
PUBLIC scr_ldm
scr_ldm PROC
FAR
ASSUME
CS:CSEG
mov cx,100

mov di,o
mov si,o

;no. of raster pairs
;index to screen buffer
;index to dummy array

0055:
push ex
mov cx,so

;raster row length

0056:
mov al,es: [di]

mov ah,es:[di+2000HJ

;load even row physical buffer
;odd row physical buffer

push es
mov es,msell
mov es: (si] ,al
mov es:[si+SO],ah

;load even rows
;odd rows

pop es
inc si

inc di
loop 0056
add si,so
pop ex
loop 0055

;skip to next double set

ret
scr ldm ENDP
CSEG
ENDS
END

Figure 3.2 The modified scrld.asm (scrldm.asm) used with the program
wolnm.asm.

Sec. 3.2

Memory Management Activities

PAGE
TITLE

101

55,132
prtacrm - print acraan (prtscrm.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This routine prints ths screen in
320 x 200 CGA mode. Thia routins uaes DYNAMIC
MEMORY ALLOCATION. This routine needs the
followinq data items in the callinq routine
data seqment:
in buffer
byteain
bytes out
in bufferl
bytesinl
in buffer2
byteain2
in buf fer3
bytesin3
in_buf f er4

db

dev name
dev-hand
dev-act
dev-size
dev-attr
dev:flaq
dev_mode
dev_rsv dd

db

1

dw
dw
dd
dw
dw
dw
0

0
0
0
0
OOOOOOOlb
OOOOOOOOllOOOOOlb

MM

db
db
db

40H,lOH,04H,OlH

dw
dw
db
dw
db
dw
db

dw
db

320 dup(O)
320
0
lBH,4BH,64D,OlH
4
ODH,OAH
2
1BH,41H,08H
3
1BH,32H
;

w
coll
N
N4
S

shiftl
eiqht
eiqhty
bl
four
ddd
aixforty

dw
dw
db
db

dw
dw
db

dw
dw
dw

LPT1' ,O

128,64,32,16,8,4,2,1

320 dup(?)
?
?
4 dup(?)
6,4,2,0

8
80
4 dup(?)
4
?

640

I

EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN

EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN

MM:BYTE,w:BYTE,coll:BYTE
in_buffer:BYTE,in_bufferl:BYTE,in_buffer2:BYTE
in bufferJ:BYTE,in buffer4:BYTE
bytesin:WORD,bytesinl:WORD,bytesin2:WORD,bytesinJ:WORD
bytesout:WORD,dev name:BYTE,dev hand:WORD
dev act:WORD,dev size:DWORD,dev-attr:WORD
dev:flaq:WORD,dev_mode:WORD,dev:rsv:DWORD
N:WORD,N4:WORD
eiqhty:WORD,eiqht:WORD,four:WORD,s:BYTE,shiftl:BYTE
ddd:WORD,bl:BYTE,sixforty:WORD,msell:WORD

I Fl
include sysmac.inc
ENDIF
.sall
CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
PUBLIC prtscrm

Figure 3.3 The modified prtscr.asm (prtscm.asm) used with the program
twolnm.asm.

102

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

prtscrm PROC
ASSUME

Chap. 3

FAR
CS:CSEG
;open device

@DosOpen dev_name,dev_hand,dev_act,dev_size,dev_attr,dev_flaq,dev_mode,dev_rsv
cmp ax,O

je ELSEl

;Exit

ret
ELSEl:
;initialize device
@DosWrite dev hand,in buffer3,bytesin3,bytesout
@DosWrite dev:hand,in:buffer4,bytesin2,bytesout
;

;number print lines(+l)
;index to 8 row block

mov dx,25

mov si,o
I.OOPl:
push dx
push si
mov ax,si
mul sixforty

;preserve dx
;preserve block count

mov N,ax

;Save in N

;640 block size

call ldarray
;

mov di,O
mov cx,80

;initialize 320 column counter

mov al,coll[di]
mov in_buffer[di],al
mov al,coll[di+l]
mov in_buffer[di+l],al
mov al,coll[di+2]
mov in_buffer[di+2],al
mov al,coll[di+3]
mov in_buffer[di+3],al
add di,four
loop I.OOP2

;column 1 from byte
;load print buffer
;column 2 from byte
;load print buffer
;column 3 from byte
;load print buffer
;column 4 from byte
;load print buffer
;increment column index

;count of column bytes

I.OOP2:

;write print row
@DosWrite dev_hand,in_bufferl,bytesinl,bytesout
@Doswrite dev hand,in buffer,bytesin,bytesout
@DosWrite dev:hand,in:buffer2,bytesin2,bytesout
;

;recall block count
;recall print line count
;decrement count

pop si
pop dx
dee dx

inc si
cmp dx,O
jle DIIl

;increase block count
;check 25 lines printed

jmp LOOPl
DIIl:
@Dosclose dev_hand
ret
prtscrm endp

;close print device

I

ldarray PROC

NEAR

N is the printer row # - 640 byte intervals [0,24]
MM[O] = 40H, ••• ,MM[3] = OlH (pel mask)
w[OJ = 128,w[l] = 64, ••• ,w[7] = 1

mov si,o
mov cx,320

;column count initialization
;320 columns

00110:
mov al,O
mov coll[si],al
inc si
loop 00110

;clear print buffer
; increment column count

Figure 3.3 (Continued)

Sec. 3.2

103

Memory Management Activities

mov si,o
mov N4,si
mov dx,80

N4 - row byte block count

index into 80 bytes/row

mov di,o
mov ddd,di
mov cx,e

;raster row counter (l of 8)
;80 block counter
;raster row counter

push ex
mov bp,ddd
add bp,N

;preserve row count
;bp = t 80 byte blocks
;add printer line count

push es
push msell
pop es
mov sl,es:(bp+si]
pop es

;load address screen buffer

mov s(O],al
mov s(l],al
mov s(2],al
mov s(3] ,al

;lst copy
;2nd copy
;3rd copy
;4th copy

and al,MM[O]
mov cl,shiftl[O]
shr al,cl
mov ah,O
mul w[di]
mov bl[O],al

;lst pel mask
;load lst pel shift
;shift right

counter - row bytes

00111:
;

00112:

;4 pel bytes

;

mov al,s(l]
and al,MM[l]
mov cl,shiftl[l]
shr al,cl
mov ah,O

mul w[di]
mov bl[l] ,al

;clear upper

;multiply by weight (row)
;save lst printer column
;load 2nd pel
;mask 2nd pel
;load 2nd pel shift
;shift right
;clear upper
;multiply by weight (row)
;save 2nd printer column
;

shr al,cl

;load 3rd pel
;mask 3rd pel
;load 3rd pel shift
;shift right

mov ah,O

;clear upper

mov al,s(2)
and al,MM[2)
mov cl,shiftl[2)
mul w[di]
mov bl[2) ,al

;multiply by weight (row)
;save 3rd printer column

mov al,s(3]
and al,MM[3)
mov cl,shiftl[3)

;load 4th pel
;mask 4th pel
;load 4th pel shift
;shift right

shr al,cl
mov ah,O

;clear upper

mul w[di]
mov bl[3],al

;multiply by weight (row)
;save 4th printer column

push bx

;preserve bx
;counter into print buffer

;

mov bx,N4

mov al,bl[O]
add coll[bx],al
mov al,bl[l]
add coll[bx+l],al
mov al,bl[2]
add coll[bx+2],al
mov al,bl[3]
add coll[bx+3],al

;load column N4
;load column N4+1

;load column N4+2
;load column N4+3

Figure 3.3 (Co11ti11ued)

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

104

Chap. 3

pop bx
pop ex
inc di
add ddd,80
dee ex
cmp cx,o
jle 00133
jmp 00112

;recall print block row index
;increase print block row counter
;increase byte count
;decrease row bound

add N4,4
dee dx
inc si
cmp dx,O
jle DII2
jmp 00111

;add 4 columns to index
;decrement row bytes
;increase screen buffer index

00133:

DII2:
ret
ldarray ENDP
;
CSEG

ENDS
END

Figure 3.3 (Co11cluded)

push bx
lea bx,scr_buffer[OJ
add bp,bx
mov al,ds: [bp+si]
pop bx

This now reads
push es
push msell
pop es
mov al,es:[bp+si)
pop es

where the same buffer now appears starting at es:OOOO.
Figures 3.1 through 3.3 represent simple examples of how to create and use a
memory segment under OS/2. In this case the temporary screen buffer is created,
accessed, and destroyed. Clearly, this technique can be used to manage memory
within a given task. In the next section we consider the creation, access, and destruction of a segment shared between two tasks.

Sec. 3.2

105

Memory Management Activities

3.2.2 Creating and Accessing a Shared Segment
The program discussed in this section involves both a memory management function
and multitasking. Although we do not formally address multitasking until Section
3.3, it is useful to include it in this discussion because at least two processes are
needed to demonstrate segment sharing.
The program illustrated in Figure 3.4 opens with the following API call (which
creates the shared segment):
@DosAllocShrSeg shared_length,shrname,shrsel

Here shared_length has been set at 404 bytes. These will correspond to 400 bytes (4
extra bytes used to contain parameter data) that contain the corner values for boxes
(xb, xe, yb, and ye). Further, these corner values will consist of numbers between 0
and 200; hence the full height of the display screen will be used but only the first
200 columns.
The parameter shrname is a symbolic name to be associated with the shared
memory segment to be allocated. The name string must include the prefix
\SHAREMEM\ •••

We choose
'\SHAREMEM\SDAT.DAT',o

which is a zero-terminated string. Finally, shrsel is the shared segment selector. The
name string for· the shared segment must be common to all modules that use this
segment and hence provides the link for ensuring that the same protected segment
is accessed.
In Figure 3.4, once the shared segment is allocated, the buffer contained in this
segment is set to zero. Next a child process is executed using the statement
@DosExecPgm obj_name_buf,
pid, prgm_nm

lobj_name_buf,

async,

argptr,

envptr,

where obj_name_buf is a buffer containing error pointers, lobj_name_buf is the
length of this buffer, async =1 indicates the two processes execute asynchronously,
argptr =0, envptr =0, pid contains return codes, and prgm_num is the name of the
file to be executed (in this case NOS261.EXE, which is zero terminated). This
causes the process in Figure 3.5 to execute, NOS261.ASM.
The process NOS261.ASM gets the shared segment using
@DosGetShrSeg shrname,

shrsel

where the shared name, shrname, is the same but a new selector is assigned. Next,
a sequence of random numbers are loaded into the shared segment locations based
on the following formula [3]:
xn+l

=(2053 xn + 13,849) mod 216

(3.1)

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

106

PAGE 55,132
TITLE OS2512 - This is the calling OS/2 program (NOS2512.ASM)
DESCRIPTION: This program plots boxes in protected
mods and hesitates using a keyboard delay. Graphics
mode 05H is used to display the boxes. It is the same
as OS24 except it uses external modules. This routine
employs multitasking to access the input box parameters,
which are generated randomly (100 boxes in square 200 x 200).
The program prints graphics under program control •
• 8087

EXTRN

boxx:FAR,cls:FAR,clsCGA:FAR,scr_ld:FAR,prtscr:FAR

PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC

viohdl,tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,CGAm,lmodeE,typeCGA,colCGA
txtcCGA,txtrCGA,hrcGA,vrCGA,STDm,lmodeBO,typeSO,colSO
txtcso,txtrso,hrso,vrso,waitf,dstat,PVBptrl,bufstl,buflenl,physell

PUBLIC

MASKl,MASKll,OFFSETl,four,xx:,dummy,two,xxx,eighty,row,col

PUBLIC

address,x,y,xb,xe,ye,yb

Printscreen variables
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC

in buffer,in bufferl,in buffer2,in buffer3,in buffer4
-

bytesin,bytesinl,bytesin2,bytesin3~bytesout

dev_name,dev_hand,dev_act,dev_aize,dev_attr,dev_flaq
dev mode,dev rsv,MM,coll,N

s,eight,eighty,four,shiftl,scr_buffer
sixforty,N4,ddd,w,bl

I Fl
include sysmac.inc
ENDIF

dgroup
STACK

.sall
GROUP

:suppresses macro lists
data

STACK

SEGMENT PARA STACK 'STACK'
db
256 dup( 'STACK
')
ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'

viohdl equ
result dw
action equ
tr
dw
le
dw
br
dw
re
dw
no line dw
dw
blank

0
0
0
0
0
23
79
25
0007H

CGAm
label
lmodeE dw
typeCGA db
colCGA db
txtcCGA dw
txtrCGA dw

FAR
12
OOOOOlllB
2
40
25

:Required video handle
:completion code
;Terminates current thread
;Top row screen clear
;Left column screen clear

;Bottom row screen clear
:Right column screen clear
:Number lines scrolled
;Blank character pair

:Video mode structure-CGA
:structure length
:Mode identifier
:Color option-Mode 5
:text characters/line-ignore
;text lineS-i~nore

Figure 3.4 The program nos2512.asm, which creates a shared segment, creates
a child process, and prints the screen.

Chap. 3

Sec. 3.2

Memory Management Activities

hrCGA
vrCGA

dw
dw

STDm
label
lmode80 dw
type80 db
col80
db
txtc80 dw
txtr80 dw
hr80
dw
vr80
dw
kbd buf db
lkbd buf dw
iowait dw
kbdhdl equ
waitf
dstat

equ
db

PVBFtrl label
bufstl dd
buflenl dd
physell dw
MASKl
db
MASKll dw
OFFSET! dw
four
dw
xx
dw
dummy
dw
two
db
xxx
db
eiqhty dw
zero
dw
one
dw
row
dw
col
dw
address dw
x
y
xb

xe
yb
ye

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

320
200

107

;horizontal resolution
;vertical resolution

720

;Video mode structure-80x25
;Structure lenqth
;Mode identifier-Mode 3+
;Color option
;text characters/line
;text lines
;horizontal resolution

400

;vertical resolution

80
$-kbd_buf
0
0

;Keyboard buffer
;Lenqth keyboard buffer
;Wait for CR
;Keyboard handle

1

;Screen waitinq status

FAR

12
QOOOOOOlB
4

80
25

?

;Returned status

FAR

0

;Video buffer structure
;Start physical address
;Buffer lenqth
;OS/2 screen buffer selector

OlH
OOOlH
2000H

;PEL byte mask
;Odd/even row mask
;Odd row buffer offset

OBSOOOH
8000H

4

;PEL modulo parameter

?
?

;80287 dummy "pop"

2

;output value

?

80
0
1

?
?
?

;row
;column
;Address screen dot

?
?
?
?
?
?

;Box col parameter
;Box row parameter

;Start column
;End column
;Start row

;End row

;

obj_name_buf
lobj_name_buf
a sync
dw
arqptr dw
envptr dw
pid
dw
dw
prqm_nm db

dd
dw

10 dup(O)
$-obj_name_buf

1
0
0

;object name buffer
;buffer lenqth
;Flaq indicates async
;O for arqument ptr
;o for environment ptr

?
?

;Process ID result code

'NOS261.EXE',O

;proqram name & parameter

;

shared_lenqth
shrname db
shrsel dw

dw
404
1 \SHAREMEM\SDAT.DAT',O

;Lenqth shared buffer

?

;selector

ESDI
count

400 dup(?)
?

;Buffer for shared data
;Buffer size in bytes

db
dw

Printscreen Variables

Figure 3.4 (Continued)

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

108

eiqht
dw
in buffer
in-bufferl
in-buffer2
in-buffer3
in-buffer4
bytes in
bytesinl
bytesin2
bytesin3
bytesout

B

dw

320 dup(O)
;print buffer
1Bh,4BH,64D,OlH ;printer setup
ODH,OAH
;LF/CR
1BH,41H,OBH
1BH,32H
320
;print buffer count
4
;count bytes in_bufferl
;count bytes in_buffer2
2
;count bytes in_buffer3
3

dw

0

db
db
db
db
db

dw
dw
dw

dev name

db

'LPTl' ,O

dev-hand
dev:act
dev size
dev-attr
dev-flaq
dev-mode
dev:rsv dd

dw
dw
dd
dw
dw
dw

0
0
0
0

OOOOOOOlb
;open file
;hdl private,deny none,w/o
OOOOOOOOllOOOOOlb

0

N4

dw

?

MM

db
db
db
db

40H,lOH,04H,OlH

w
coll
bl
N
shiftl

•

dw
db
db

ddd
dw
sixforty
acr_buffer

;name of printer device
;device handle

128,64,32,16,8,4,2,1

320 dup(?)
4 dup(?)
?

;pel mask
;pin weiqhts
;columns

6,4,2,0

4 dup(?)
?
dw
640
db
16384 dup(O)

;temporary buffer

I

DATA
I

CSEG
OS21

ENDS

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 1 CODE 1
aeeume ce:cseq,ds:dqroup
PROC
FAR
@DosAlloCShrSeq shared_lenqth,shrname,shrsel
;Check on successful creation
;Successful
;Error

cmp ax,o
jz NO ERRORl

jmp ERRORl
NO_ERRORl:
push shrsel
pop es

;Save selector

;Selector in extra seqment

mov ax, one

mov es: (2] ,ax

;Flaq indicatinq creation

mov ax,shared_lenqth
mov es: [OJ ,ax

;Lenqth shared buffer
;Lenqth parameter passed-multitask

mov di, four
mov cx,shared_lenqth
sub ex, four
mov ax, zero

;Data record offset in buffer
;Data buffer lenqth + 4
;Data buffer lenqth
;Clear character

mov es: [di] ,al
inc di
loop lloop

;Clear buffer
;Next buffer point

;

I

lloop:

Figure 3.4 (Co11tinued)

Chap. 3

Sec. 3.2

Memory Management Activities

@DosExecPgm obj_name_buf,lobj_name_buf,async,argptr,envptr,pid,prgm_nm
cmp ax,O
;Check error condition

jz NO_ERROR2

;Jump no error

jmp ERROR2

:Jump error

NO_ERROR2:
mov ax,zero

;Indicates buffer write complete

NO_ERROR22:
cmp es: (2) ,ax

;Check buffer write

jz MEM_CL
jmp NO_ERROR22

;Jump if buffer write complete
;Otherwise wait

mov si,zero
mov di,four
mov cx,shared length

;Offset in intermediate buffer
;Offset in shared buffer
;Length data buffer + 4
:Length data buffer

MEM_CL:

sub ex, four

-

mov count,cx

;Data buffer size in bytes

mov al,es: [di]
mov ESDI[si],al
inc di
inc si
loop loop22

;Obtain shared buffer value

call els
@VioSetMode CGAm,viohdl
call clsCGA
@VioScrLock waitf ,dstat,viohdl
@VioGetPhysBuf PVBptrl,viohdl
push physell
pop es

;Clear screen
;Set CGA graphics mode
;Clear CGA screen
;Lock screen context

loop22:

mov di,O
mov dx,o
mov ax, count
div four
mov cx,ax

;Load shared memory buffer

;Increment shared buffer ptr
;Increment intermediate buffer ptr

;Get physical buffer selector
;save selector
;Load selector into extra segment

;Intermediate buffer offset
;Clear upper dividand
;Data buffer byte count
;Reduce to sets of four
;Loop count

loop2:
push ex
mov al,ESDI[di]
mov ah,ESDI[di+l]
cmp ah,al
jne EELSEl
mov al,170
mov ah,180

call xload
jmp IIFl

;Save loop count

;Obtain 1st buffer value-set
;Obtain 2nd buffer value-set
;Check values equal
;Arbitrarily set 1st equal value
;Arbitrarily set 2nd equal value
;Load xb and xe

EELSEl:
cmp ah,al
jle ELSEl
call xload
jmp IIFl

;Check ah g.t. al

mov bl,al

;swap ah and al

;Load xb and xe

ELSEl:
mov al,ah

mov ah,bl
call xload

;Load xb and xe

IIFl:
mov al,ESDI[di+2]
mov ah,ESDI[di+3]
cmp ah,al
jne EELSE2

;Obtain Jrd buffer value-set
;Obtain 4th buffer value-set
;Check values equal

Figure 3.4 (Co11ti11ued)

109

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

110

;Arbitrarily set lst equal value
;Arbitrarily set 2nd equal value
;Load yb and ye

mov al,170
mov ah,180

call yload
jmp IIF2
EELSE2:
cmp ah,al

;Check ah g.t. al

jle ELSE2
call yload
jmp IIF2

;Load yb and ye

mov bl,al

;Swap ah and al

ELSE2:
mov al,ah
mov ah,bl
;Load yb and ye

call yload
IIF2:
push di
call boxx
pop di
add di,four

;save buff er offset

pop ex
loop loop2

;Recall loop count

call scr_ld

;load screen print buffers

;Draw box

;Recall buffer offset
;Increment data ptr 4 bytes

@VioscrUnLock
viohdl
;Unlock screen context
@KbdStringin kbd_buf,lkbd_buf,iowait,kbdhdl
;hesitate
@VioSetMode STDm,viohdl

;80 x 25 alpha mode

@DosKillProcess l,pid

;Terminate child process

@DosFreeSeg shrsel

;Free shared memory

ERROR2:
ERRORl:
call prtscr
@DosClose dev hand
@DosExit actiOn,result

0521

ENDP

xload

PROC
NEAR
mov bh,O
mov bl,al
mov xb,bx
mov bh,O
mov bl,ah
mov xe,bx
ret
ENDP

xload

yload

yload
CSEG

PROC
NEAR
mov bh,O
mov bl,al
mov yb,bx
mov bh,O
mov bl,ah
mov ye,bx
ret
ENDP
ENDS
END

;Terminate process

;Clear upper register half

;al = start
;Load xb less than 199
;Clear upper register half
;ah = end

;Load xe less than 199

;Clear upper register half
;al = start

;Load yb less than 199
;Clear upper register half
;ah = end

;Load ye less than 199

0521

Figure 3.4 (Concluded)

Chap. 3

Sec. 3.2

111

Memory Management Activities

PAGE 55,132
TITLE OS261 - Generates multitask r.n. (OS261.ASM)
DESCRIPTION: This process generates the multitasked
random numbers. It is called by the plot process •
• 8087

I Fl
include sysmac.inc
ENDIF
dgroup
STACKl
STACKl

.sall
GROUP

;Suppresses macro lists

datal

SEGMENT PARA STACK 'STACK'
db
256 dup( 'STACKl ')
ENDS

;

DATAl

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'

rndl

dw

?

dw
equ
dw
ssize
dw
shrsel dw
shrname db
zero
dw

0
0
?
?

one
action
result

1

'\SHAREMEM\SDAT.DAT',O

;Buffer size + 4
;Selector
;Shared memory name

0

DATAl

ENDS

CSEGl

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'

08261

;seed value

assume

cs:csegl,ds:dgroup

PROC

FAR

mov ax,one

;Load initial seed value

mov rndl,ax
@DosGetShrSeg shrname,shrsel
push shrsel
pop es

;Get shared segment
;Save selector

mov ax, es: [OJ
mov ssize,ax
mov di,4
mov cx,ssize
sub cx,4

;Selector to extra segment
;Establish shared buffer size

;Define buffer size + 4

;Pointer to data buffer
;Loop byte count + 4
;Loop byte count

loopl:
mov al,O
mov es: [di] ,al
inc di
loop loopl

mov di,4
mov cx,ssize
sub cx,4

;Clear buffer
;Buffer write
;Increment offset

;Pointer to data buffer
;Loop byte count + 4
;Loop byte count

loop2:
call ldmem
mov es: [di] ,al
inc di
loop loop2

;Generate random value

;Load shared buffer (byte)
;Increment byte offset

Figure 3.5 The child process nos261.asm, used to generate random numbers in
a Protected Mode multitasked environment.

112

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

;Flaq indicating write complete
;Flag loaded

mov ax, zero
mov es:[2],ax

;

@DosFreeSeg shrsel
@DosExit action,result
08261

ldmem

ENDP
PROC

NEAR

mov dx,o
mov ax,rndl
mov bx,2053

ldmem
CSEGl

mul bx
mov bx,13849
clc
add ax,bx
adc dx,O
mov bx,OFFFFH
div bx
mov ax,dx
mov rndl,ax
mov bx,350
mov dx,o
div bx
mov ah,O
ret
ENDP
ENDS
END

;Generate r.n.
;Load upper multiplicand zero

;Load previous r.n.
;Multiplier
;Load additative constant
;Add low order result

;Add carry if needed
1Load 2 (16) - l
;Calculate modulo

;Move remainder into ax
;Save r.n.
;Scale r.n. to less than 200

;Clear upper dividand
;Scale

;Save al

08261

Figure 3.5 (Concluded)

Here xn+i is the (n + l)th number and xn the nth number(s). The procedure ldmem
contains the code that calculates this random sequence. Once the sequence is calculated, the size of the buffer is checked. This size was loaded as a word at es:[O] in
the creating routine. In NOS261.ASM the value is used to set the number of random
values to be calculated (here this is 400).
Next, NOS261.ASM frees the shared segment using
@DosFreeSeg shrsel

and exits back to OS/2. Prior to freeing the segment, however, NOS261.ASM loads
a zero at es:[2] to indicate that the buffer write is complete. (This value was previously set to 1.) The main calling program, NOS2512.ASM, sits in a loop checking
es:[2] for a value of zero. (This is a somewhat wasteful operation and could be used
asynchronously to accomplish other tasks if needed.) Once the random values have
been completely loaded and NOS2512.ASM becomes aware of this, it terminates the
loop and reloads these shared values into a buffer, ESDI. The processing then
continues in the usual fashion to clear the screen, set the CGA mode, and capture
the physical screen buffer. Using two routines, xload and yload, the box corners are
loaded, ensuring that (xb, yb) are always less than (xe, ye), respectively. The routine boxx is called and the random boxes generated on the display. Figure 3.6 illustrates the variant of boxx used for this call. Note that it includes a check on the
corners to ensure that xb < xe and yb < ye.

Sec. 3.2

113

Memory Management Activities

PAGE 55,132
TITLE OS252 - Supplemental routines for box plotting (OS252.ASM)
DESCRIPTION: These routines set up box plots in CGA
mode and hesitate using a keyboard delay. Graphics
mode 05H is used to display the box. This set of routines
is callsd by box plotting main routine .
• 8087
I Fl
include sysmac.inc

ENDIF
.sall
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN

EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
CSEG
PUBLIC
boxx

;Suppresses macro lists

viohdl:WORD,tr:WORD,lc:WORD,br:WORD,rc:WORD
no_line:WORD,blank:WORD,CGAm:FAR,lmodeE:WORD,typeCGA:BYTE
colCGA:BYTE,txtcCGA:WORD,txtrCGA:WORD,hrCGA:WORD,vrCGA:WORD
STDm:FAR,lmode80:WORD,typeSO:BYTE,colSO:BYTE,txtc80:WORD,txtrSO:WORD
hrSO:WORD,vrSO:WORD
waitf:WORD,dstat:BYTE,PVBPtrl:FAR,bufstl:DWORD
buflen1:DWORD,physel1:WORD,MASK1:BYTE,MASK1l:WORD,OFFSET1:WORD
four:WORD,xx:WORD,dummy:WORD,two:BYTE,xxx:BYTE,eighty:WORD
row:WORD,col:WORO,address:WORD,x:WORD,y:WORD,xb:WORD,xe:WORD

yb:WORD,ye:WORD
SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
cls,boxx,clsCGA
assume cs:cseg

PROC

FAR

xb = x-begin,xe

mov ax,xb
cmp ax,xe
jl ELSE10
xchg ax,xe

x-end,yb

y-begin,ye = y-end

;Check xb l.t. xe
; swap xb and xe

mov xb,ax
ELSElO:
mov ax,yb
cmp ax,ye
jl ELSEll
xchg ax,ye

;Check yb l.t. ye
;Swap yb and ye

mov yb,ax

ELSEll:
mov ax,yb

;Top box line

mov y,ax
call lineh

;Draw top horizontal line

mov ax,ye

;Bottom box line

mov y,ax
call lineh
mov ax,xb
mov x,ax
call linev
mov ax,xe
mov x,ax
call linev

boxx

ret
ENDP

els

PROC

;Draw bottom horizontal line
;Left box line
;Draw left vertical line

;Right box line
;Draw right vertical line

FAR

@VioScrollUp tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl

Figure 3.6 Supplemental routines needed by the random box generating
routine, nos2512.asm.

114

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

ret
els

ENDP

clsCGA

PROC

FAR

@VioscrLock waitf,dstat,viohdl
@VioGetPhysBuf PVBptrl,viohdl
push physell
pop es

mov bp,O

;Lock screen context

;Get physical buffer
;Screen selector
;Load extra segment

;Start offset zero
;Zero attribute-clear

mov al,O

001:
moves: [bp],al
inc bp
cmp bp,lFJFH
jle DOl

;Clear byte

mov bp,2000H

;Offset 2nd buffer-odd

;Check end 1st buffer

mov al,O

;Zero attribute-clear

mov es: [bp) ,al
inc bp
cmp bp,3F3FH
jle 002

;Clear byte

@VioScrUnLock viohdl

;Unlock screen context

002:

clsCGA

ret
ENDP

wdot

PROC

;Check end 2nd buffer

NEAR

(col,row)

=

(x,y)

fild four
fild col
fprem
fistp xx
fistp dummy
mov al,3
mov bl,byte ptr xx
sub al,bl
mov ah,O
mul two
mov cl,al
mov al,MASKl
shl al,cl
mov xxx,al

;Load stack with 4

mov ax,row

;Begin address calculation

;ST = col, ST(l) = 4
;Modulo
;Store remainder in xx
;Pop stack

;(3 -col% 4)
;Clear upper multiplicand
;Shift value for PEL
;PEL color mask

;Shift to correct PEL
;Store buffer value

shr ax,1

;Divide row by 2

mov dx,o
mul eighty

;Clear upper multiplicand

mov bx,col
shr bx,l

;Convert column value to bytes

shr bx,1
add ax,bx
mov address,ax
mov ax,row
and ax,MASKll
cmp ax,o
jle ELSEl
mov ax,address
add ax,OFFSETl
jmp IFll

;offset in ax

;Save offset base
;Check even/odd row
;Look for bit O set

;add odd buffer offset

Figure 3.6 (Continued)

Chap. 3

Sec. 3.2

115

Memory Management Activities

ELSEl:

mov ax,address
IFll:

wdot
lineh

mov bp,ax
mov al,xxx

;screen buffer address
;Attribute value for dot

or es: [bp] ,al

;Write dot

ret
ENDP
PROC

NEAR

y = row position, xb = begin, xe = end

mov ax,y

;Establish row for wdot

mov row,ax
;

mov ax,xb

;Establish start column

0010:

mov col,ax
push ax
call wdot
pop ax
inc ax
cmp ax,xe
jle 0010
lineh

ret
ENDP

linev

PROC

;save column value
;Write dot (col,row)

;Recall column
;Increment column
;Check end horizontal line

NEAR

x = col position, yb = begin, ye = end

mov ax,x
mov col,ax

;Establish column for wdot

mov ax,yb

;Establish start row

0020:

mov row,ax
push ax
call wdot
pop ax
inc ax

;Save row value
;Write dot (col,row)
;Recall row
;Increment row

cmp ax,ye

;Check end vertical line

jle 0020
linev
CSEG

ret
ENDP
ENDS
END

Figure 3.6 (Concluded)

Once the boxes are plotted the keyboard hesitate takes place, followed by a
call to prtscr that prints the screen content. A similar version of this program appears
in reference 4, without the screen print logic. Figure 3.7 illustrates the plotted boxes.
3.2.3 Changing Segment Size

Among the API memory management services are functions for changing the size of
an allocated segment. It is a prerequisite, however, that the segment be allocated
during the existing session. Figure 3.8 presents a program that allocates and then

116

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

Figure 3.7 Screen print of the 100
random boxes output by nos2512.asm.

modifies the size of a segment. This program is somewhat artificial in that it serves
no useful purpose other than to demonstrate this memory management technique.
The program opens with the call
@DosAllocSeg msize,

msell,

mflag

Here msize is the desired size of the segment (in this case 4000H), in msell the
returned selector, and mflag determines the type of segment access. Specifically, bits
0 and 1, when set, permit sharing of the segment using DosGiveSeg and DosGetSeg,
respectively. Bit 3 allows the segment to be discarded in low-memory situations. If
the segments are shared, they can only be increased in size. We have set all three
of these bits to 0.
The next block of code pushes the allocated segment selector on the stack and
pops it into es. Hence, es now points to the created segment. This segment is loaded
with 2048 copies of the string "MEMORY ", where two blank spaces have been
added to the end of the string. Once completed, the call
@DosReallocSeg msizel,

msell

is made and the segment size reduced to one byte beyond a paragraph boundary. At
this point some mechanism must exist to check the segment definition. Subsequent
code writes a 1 into the first location of the segment, followed by a write to the
eighteenth position. The latter position should yield a protection violation.
Figure 3.9 illustrates CodeView results for the program following creation of
the memory segment. Note that beginning at address es:OxOOOO (here OxOOOO specifies a hexadecimal address, 0000, in C notation), the string "MEMORY "is loaded.
A check at Ox4000 shows that the preceding 4000H locations are filled with this
string also (Figure 3.9b).

Sec. 3.2

117

Memory Management Activities

PAGE 55,132
TITLE MEMSEG -- Reallocate memory segment (memseg.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This simple routine creates and reallocates
a memory segment. The final memory instruction is
designed to create a protection violation. The program
should be run with CodeView.
I Fl
include sysmac.inc
ENDIF
dgroup
STACK
STACK
DATA

.sall
GROUP

data

SEGMENT PARA STACK 'STACK'
db
256 dup ('STACK
')
ENDS
SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'

;

maize
msell
mflag
blk ct
mem-wd

dw
dw
dw
dw

msiie1

dw

db

16385

;buffer size

?

;selector

OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOB

;not sharable

16384
;block count
'M', 'E', 'M', 1 0 1 , 'R', 'Y', • •,' ' ;string
17
;new buffer size

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:cseg,ds:dgroup
PROC
FAR

OS21

@DosAllocSeg

msize,msell,mflag

;allocate segment

push msell
pop es
mov dx,blk ct
mov di,o lea bp,mem_wd

;block counter limit
;buffer block count
;string address

LOOPl:
;count limit for strinq
;index for string/buffer

mov cx,8
mov si,o

LOOP2:
mov al,ds:[bp+si]
mov es: [di] ,al
inc si
inc di
loop LOOP2

;load from string

cmp di,dx
jl LOOPl

;check block limit

@DosReallocSeg

msizel,msell

push msell
pop es
mov bp,O
mov al,1
mov es: [bp] ,al
mov es:[bp+l7],al

;load buffer

;increment string
;increment block byte

;reallocate segment
;preserve selector
;create extra segment

;segment index
;load dummy value
:single load in buffer

;PROTECTION VIOLATION

Figure 3.8 Simple routine for creating and reallocating memory.

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

118

Chap. 3

@DosExit l,O
OS21
CSEG

ENDP
ENDS
END

0521

Figure 3.8 (Concluded)

: File

Search

003F:002F 268805
003F:0032 46
003F:0033 47
003F:0034 E2F6
003F:0036 3BFA
003F:0038 7CEC
003F:003A AllOOO

View

Run

Watch
MOV
INC
INC
LOOP
CMP
JL
MOV

Options

Calls

Trace!

Go!

MEMSEG.EXE

Byte Ptr ES: [DI] ,AL
SI
DI
002C
DI,DX
0026
AX, Word 'E'tr [ooIOJ

IBM CodeView (R) Version 1.00
Copyright (C) IBM Corporation 1987
Copyright (C) Microsoft (R) Corporation 1986, 1987
>d es:OxOOOO
OOSF:OOOO 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F:0010 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F:0020 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F 0030 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
OOSF 0040 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F 0050 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F 0060 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F 0070 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
>

I
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY

MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY

(a)

Figure 3.9 Facsimile CodeView output, illustrating (a) low end of initialized memory
segment and (b) high end of initialized memory segment. (Courtesy of the Microsoft
Corporation.)

Sec. 3.2

= File

Search

119

Memory Management Activities

View

Run

Watch

---------··---j

Options

Calls

Trace!

Go!

MEMSEG.EXE

0=-'0~3~F~:~00~2~C:'--':3~E78A~0~2,-------~MO~V~--~A~L~,~B-yt-e~P~t-r-D~S~:~[~B~P+-S-I-]--------~I··,

003F:002F 268805
003F: 0032 46
003F: 0033 4 7
003F:0034 E2F6
003F:0036 3BFA
003F:0038 7CEC
003F:003A AllOOO

MOV
INC
INC
LOOP
CMP
JL
MOV

Byte Ptr ES:[DI],AL
SI
DI
002C
DI,DX
0026
AX, Word Ptr [0010]

006F:0060 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F:0070 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
>d es:Ox3ff0
006F: 3FFO 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F:4000 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:4010 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:4020 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F 4030 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F 4040 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F 4050 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F 4060 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
>

MEMORY
MEMORY

MEMORY
MEMORY

MEMORY MEMORY
??????? ???????
??????? ???????
??????? ???????
??????? ???????
??????? ???????
??????? ???????
??????? ???????

(b)

Figure 3.9 (Concluded)

Figure 3.lOa corresponds to execution up to 003F:0055, in which the resized
segment now has its first location loaded with 1. Figure 3.lOb corresponds to execution of 003F:0055 and the subsequent violation is noted.
Figure 3.11 illustrates CodeView output for the case when a segment violation
might occur except that the segment is defined as sharable with bits 0 and 1 of
mflag set. In this case the attempt to reallocate the size of the segment downward
to 17 bytes fails and the initial segment size remains implemented. The instruction
003F:0055 executes as the segment data indicate.
3.2.4 Creating and Accessing Huge Segments

The OS/2 kernel (level 0) allocates and maintains segment descriptors. This provides
a mapping of the virtual address space onto the physical memory space. OS/2 does,
in fact, allow the user the capability to request and use more memory than exists in
his or her system. This is accomplished using extended file management techniques.
A very key boundary under DOS and within the confines of the Intel 8086 family
of architectures is the 64K boundary or segment size. OS/2 has API services that
allow the user to extend a huge memory block because the underlying segments are
still in place. The system simply provides additional selectors, as needed, to access
the subsequent high-memory spaces.

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

120

s File

Search

View

003F:0042 9AOOOOB345
003F:0047 FF360200
003F:004B 07
003F:004C BDOOOO
003F:004F BOOl
003F:0051 26884600
003F:0055 26884611
003F:0059 B80100

Run

Watch

CALL
PUSH
POP
MOV
MOV
MOV
MOV
MOV

Options

Calls

Trace!

Go!

Chap. 3

MEMSEG.EXE

45B3:0000
Word Ptr [0002)
ES
BP,0000
AL,01
Byte Ptr ES:[BP+OO),AL
Bzte Ptr ES:[BP+11],AL
AX,0001

Copyright (C) IBM Corporation 1987
Copyright (C) Microsoft (R) Corporation 1986, 1987
>d es:OxOOOO
006F:OOOO 01 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59
006F:0010 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0020 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0030 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0040 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0050 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0060 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0070 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??

I

20 20

.EMORY

?? ??
?? ??
?? ??
?? ??
?? ??
?? ??
?? ??

????????????????
???????i????????
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????

MEMORY

>

(a)

= File

Search

View

Run

Watch

------------j
003F:0042 9AOOOOB345
003F:0047 FF360200
003F:004B 07

CALL
PUSH
POP

Options

Calls

Trace!

Go!

I

MEMSEG.EXE

I45B3:0000
Word Ptr [0002)
ES

~00~3~F~:0~0~4~C;--;:B~D~070~00;;.:..:::._--~M~OT.V---~B~P~,~0~0~070::....;==..'-"-'::::_-=.="'-'-=:.----------··
003F:004F BOOl
003F:0051 26884600
003F:0055 26884611
003F:0059 B80100

MOV
MOV
MOV
MOV

AL,01
Byte Ptr ES:[BP+OO],AL
Byte Ptr ES:[BP+11],AL
AX,0001

Copyright (C) Microsoft (R) Corporation 1986, 1987
>d es:OxOOOO
006F:OOOO 01 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59
006F:0010 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0020 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0030 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0040 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0050 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0060 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:0070 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
>Segmentation violation

20 20

.EMORY

?? ??
?? ??
?? ??
?? ??
?? ??
?? ??
?? ??

????????????????
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????

MEMORY

(b)

Figure 3.10 Facilimile CodeView output, illustrating (a) reallocated memory and (b)
reallocated memory with protection violation. (Courtesy of the Microsoft Corporation.)

Sec. 3.2

= File

Search

121

Memory Management Activities

View

003F:0042 9AOOOOB345
003F:0047 FF360200
003F:004B 07
003F:004C BDOOOO
003F:004F BOOl
003F:0051 26884600
003F:0055 26884611
QQ3F:Q059 B80100

Run Watch Options
--j r
CALL
PUSH
POP
MOV
MOV
MOV
MOV
MOV

Calls

Trace!

Go!

MEMSEG.EXE
l

45B3:0000
Word Ptr [0002]
ES
BP,0000
AL,01
Byte Ptr ES:[BP+OO],AL
BLte Ptr ES:l_BP+ll],AL
AX,0001
l

07E7:0060 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
07E7:0070 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
>d es:OxOOOO
07E7:0000 01 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
07E7:0010 4D 01 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
07E7:0020 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
07E7:0030 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
07E7:0040 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
07E7:0050 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
07E7:0060 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
07E7:0070 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
>

MEMORY
MEMORY

MEMORY
MEMORY

.EMORY
M.MORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY

MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY

Figure 3.11 Facsimile CodeView output, illustrating reallocated memory for the conditions
of Figure 3.lOb with sharable memory. Note: There is no protection violation. (Courtesy
of the Microsoft Corporation.)

Figure 3.12 illustrates a program hugeseg.asm, which is used for allocating
such a huge segment. In this case 81,920 bytes are allocated. The initial call is
@DosAllocHuge mnumseg,

msize,

msell,

msegmax,

mflag

where

mnumseg

number of 64K whole blocks in segment

msize

number of bytes in last non-whole block

msell

selector

msegmax

maximum number of 64K whole segments occupied
(set = 0 means the segment can only be decreased)

mflag

bit 0=1 (shareable through DosGiveSeg)
bit 1=1 (shareable through DosGetSeg)
bit 2=1 (discardable in low-memory cases)

In the program we use one 64K whole segment and a partial memory block of
16,384 bytes. The initial selector value returned by @DosAllocHuge points to the
first block in the huge segment. Subsequent blocks must be accessed using

122

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

PAGE 55,132
TITLE HUGESEG -- Allocate a huge segment (hugeseg.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This program allocates a huge segment:
2 (65536) and 1 (16384) byte 64k blocks. It is checked
using CodeView.
I Fl

include sysmac.inc
ENDIF
dgroup
STACK

.sall
GROUP

;suppresses listing
data

STACK

SEGMENT PARA STACK 'STACK'
db
256 dup ('STACK
')
ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'

mnumseg dw
msize
dw
msell
dw
msegmax dw
mflag
dw
blk ct dw
shift ct

mem wd

;number 64k whole blocks
;bytes in last block (partial)
?
;selector
0
;maximum realloc 64k blocks
OOOOOOOOOOOOOlllB
;segment characteristics
8192,2048
;bytes in each block
dw
?
;shift count
1 M1 , 1 E 1 , 1 M1 ,'0','R','Y','
',' I
1
;block counter ( O, l)
1

16384

db

mseg_ct dw
two
dw

2

DATA ENDS
CSEG
OS21

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'

assume

cs:CSEG,ds:dgroup

PROC

FAR

@DosAllocHuge

mnumseg,msize,msell,msegmax,mflag

mov si,o

;block index
;preserve index

push si
LOOP3:
pop si

;recall block index
;load selector
;check if 1st block
;jump if 1st block

mov ax,msell
cmp si,1
jl ELSEl
@DosGetHugeShift

shift_ct

mov bx,1
mov cl,byte ptr shift_ct
shl bx,cl

mov ax,msell
add ax,bx

;get shift count
;bx to be shifted
;load shift as byte
;amount shifted
;reload selector
;create new selector

ELSEl:

mov msell,ax

;reload selector

push si
mov ax,si
mul two
mov si,ax
mov dx,blk_ct[si]

;block byte sount

pop si

Figure 3.12 The program hugescg.asm, used for allocating a huge segment
(81,920 bytes).

Chap. 3

Sec. 3.2

123

Memory Management Activities

lea bp,mem_wd
inc si
push si
push msell
pop es
mov cx,dx

block internal index
address "MEMORY 11
increment block count
preserve block count
selector
selector in es
load block string count

mov si,O

;string index

mov al,ds:(bp+si]
mov es: [di] ,al
inc si
inc di
cmp si,7
jle LOOP2

;load strin9 member
;insert in huge segment

mov di,O

LOOPl:
LOOP2:

;increase string index
;increase huge segment index

;check string count

loop LOOPl
;recall block count

pop si
cmp si,mseg_ct
push si
jle LOOP3

;last block?
;preserve block count

@DosFreeSeg msell
@DosExit
OS2l
CSEG

ENDP
ENDS
END

l,O

0621

Figure 3.12 (Co11cluded)

@DosGetHugeShift. This provides a shift count that can be used to calculate an offset. Note that the call
@DosGetHugeShift shift_ct

returns a shift count in shift_ct. The selector offset increment is obtained by shifting the value 1 to the left by the amount specified as the shift count, shift_ct. This
is then added to the selector value to get the new selector. For example, suppose
that the selector is 6F7H. If the shift count returned is 4, an increment of 16 must
be added to 6F7H to get the new selector: 707H. If several blocks have been allocated, the selector for each must be obtained by adding the increment to each successive selector to obtain the following value.
In Figure 3.12 a check is made on whether the first block is being processed
(si less than 1) and the shift count processing implemented as needed. The word
"MEMORY "is then written into the memory block. Finally, the block is released
using @DosFreeSeg. Figure 3.13 illustrates the CodeView memory dump starting at
07F7:FFFO, the end of the segment. Since the listing wraps around at 07F7:FFFF, it
is clear that the 64K block is filled with "MEMORY ".Figure 3.14a illustrates the
beginning of the last partial segment and Figure 3.14b the end of this partial segment (16,384 bytes long). The partial segment is, of course, also loaded with
"MEMORY ",indicating that the allocation and use of the huge segment (81,920
bytes) was successful.

Figure 3.13 Facsimile CodeVicw output, illustrating loading through first 64K block limits
(07F7:0000 through 07F7:FFFF) of huge segment. (Courtesy of the Microsoft Corporation.)

= File

Search

View

Run

Watch

i

003F:006E 268805
003F: 0071 46
003F:0072 47
003F:0073 83FE07
003F:0076 7EF3
003F:0078 E2EE
00 3F :][O:'[A ~003F:007B 3B361800

MOV
INC
INC
CMP
JLE
LOOP
_fQ!'._

CMP

Options

r

Calls

Trace!

Go!

HUGESEG.EXE
-1

Byte Ptr ES:[DI],AL
SI
DI
SI,+07
006B
0068
SI
SI, Word Ptr [0018)
I

Copyright (C) IBM Corporation 1987
Copyright (C) Microsoft (R) Corporation 1986, 1987
>d es:OxOOOO
0807:0000 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
0807:0010 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
0807:0020 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
0807:0030 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
0807 0040 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
0807 0050 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
0807 0060 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
0807 0070 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
>

MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY

MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY
MEMORY

Figure 3.14a Facsimile CodeView output, illustrating (a) loading of second block start
(0807:0000) and (b) loading through second block end (0807:3FFF) of huge segment.
(Courtesy of the Microsoft Corporation.)

Sec. 3.2

= File

Search

125

Memory Management Activities

View

Run

Watch
l

003F:007B 3B361800
003F:007F 56
003F:0080 7EAO
003F:0082 A10400
003F:0085 50
003F:0086 9AOOOOBB45
003F:008B B80100
003F:008E 50
003F:008F B80000

CMP
PUSH

JLE
MOV
PUSH

CALL
MOV
PUSH
MOV

Options

r---

Calls

Trace!

Go!

HUGESEG.EXE
l

SI,Word Ptr [0018)
SI
0022
AX,Word Ptr [0004)
AX
45BB:OOOO
AX,0001
AX
AX,0000

OS/2 could have been structured to provide automatic memory management
features, but this would have removed some of the flexibility of the operating system. The ability to clean up memory and segregate usage expands the programmer's
access to more difficult problem-solving techniques. This is somewhat philosophical and the actual implementation of memory allocation is left up to the individual
user. It is, of course, essential for programs that push the limits of the physical
system resources.
3.2.5 Suballocating Memory

The final memory management activity considered in this section is suballocation.
This is the blocking of memory within an allocated segment and is best used if an
application requests and frees small portions of memory at a frequent rate. It has the
advantage that an allocation at the physical level is not needed. When a normal
allocation occurs an LDT entry must be defined, a descriptor defined, physical
memory located, and then the reverse when memory is released. The memory suballocation package (MSP) contains the calls
@DosSubAlloc
@Dos Subset
@DosSubFree

which allow the allocation and freeing of portions of a segment without incurring
the system overhead. The services in the MSP simply keep track of which portions
of the memory segment are in use.

126

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

Figure 3.15 presents a program that implements a memory suballocation
operation. Basically, a segment with 16,385 bytes is allocated using @DosAllocSeg.

PAGE 55,132
TITLE SUBALLO -- Reallocate memory segment (suballo.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This simple routine creates and suballocates
a memory segment. The program should be run with CodeView.
I Fl

include sysmac.inc
ENDIF
dgroup
STACK

.sall
GROUP

data

STACK

SEGMENT PARA STACK 'STACK'
db
256 dup ('STACK
')
ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'

msize

16385
?
OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOB

dw
dw
dw
dw
mem-wd db
msiZe1 dw
moffset dw
two
dw

msell
mflag
blk ct

16384,8192
;block count
'M', 'E', 'M', 1 0 1 , 'R', 'Y', • •, • •, •s•, •u•, •a•, 'A', 'L', 'L', 1 0 1 , 1 c 1
8192
;suballocated size
O
;offset to suballocated block

2

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:cseg,ds:dgroup
PROC
FAR

OS21

;buffer size
;selector
;not sharable

@DosAllocseg

msize,msell,mflag

;allocate segment

push msell
pop es

;load allocated selector
;pop to es register

mov di,O

;initialize string offset
;initialize block count variable
;preserve block count
;preserve string offset

mov si,O
push si
push di
LOOP4:
pop di
pop si

;recall string offset

mov dx,blk ct[si]
lea bp,mem=wd[di]

;block counter limit
;string address

mov di,moffset
push si
push di

;block offset in segment
;preserve block count
;preserve block offset

mov cx,s
mov si,O

;count limit for string
;index for string/buffer

mov al,ds:[bp+si]
mov es: [di] ,al
inc si
inc di
loop LOOP2

;load from string
;load buffer
;increment string
;increment block byte

push di
sub di,moffset

;block offset + block count
;block count

;recall block count

LOOPl:
LOOP2:

Figure 3.15 The program suballo.asm, which suballocates a 16,384-byte segment
into an 8192-byte block.

Sec. 3.2

127

Memory Management Activities

cmp di,dx
pop di
jl LOOPl

;check block limit
;block offset + block count

mov ax,l

;set suballocation flag
;load

mov mflaq,ax

@DosSubSet

msell,mflag,msize

@DosSubAlloc msell,moffset,msizel

pop di
pop si
add di,s
add si,2

;recall string offset

cmp si,two
push si

;compare second loop
;preserve block count

push di
jle LOOP4

;preserve string offset

;recall block count
;go to "SUBALLOC"
:increment word index

@DosFreeSeg msell
@DosExit 1,0
OS21
CSEG

ENDP
ENDS
END

OS21

Figure 3.15 (Concluded)

Then 16,384 bytes are written in blocks of 8 bytes with "MEMORY ".The service call
@DosSubSet msell,

mflag,

msize

initializes the segment for suballocation. Here msell is the allocated segment selector; mflag is set to 1, indicating that a segment is being initialized; and msize is the
original segment size.
The call
@DosSubAlloc msell,

moffset,

msizel

returns an offset in the segment pointing to the start of the suballocated block whose
size is msizel (in this case 8192 bytes). The parameter msell is, of course, the
segment selector.
Figure 3.16 illustrates the operation of this program based on CodeView output. In Figure 3.16a the initial load of the segment 006F:OOOO to 006F:3FFF is
indicated. Here the end of the segment is demonstrated to contain "MEMORY "
Next the suballocation is performed and in Figure 3.16b this is illustrated with
"SUBALLOC" loaded up to address OOOF:2007. Note that there is a slight offset
within the segment for the start of the suballocated block. This offset is 8 bytes and
results in an overall shift by this number of bytes from the start of the segment.

128

" File

Search

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

View

003F:0053 A10200
003F:0056 50
003F:0057 A10400
003F:005A 50
003F:005B AlOOOO
003F:005E 50
003F:005F 9AOOOOA700
003F:0064 A10200
003F:0067 50
003F:0068 B82FOO

Run

Watch
-j

MOV
PUSH
MOV
PUSH
MOV
PUSH
CALL
MOV
PUSH
MOV

Options

r---

Calls

Trace!

Go!

Chap. 3

SUBALLO.EXE

AX,Word Ptr [0002)
AX
AX, Word Ptr [0004)
AX
AX,Word Ptr [0000)
AX
OOA7:0000
AX,Word Ptr [0002)
AX
AX,002F

>d es:Ox3ff0
006F:3FFO 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F:4000 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:4010 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:4020 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:4030 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:4040 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:4050 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
006F:4060 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??-?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??

MEMORY MEMORY
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????
????????????????

(a)

= File Search View Run Watch Options Calls Trace! Go!
SUBALLO.EXE
·---------------·-·i r-----·-·--------------------------i
003F:0050 A30400
003F:0053 A10200
003F:0056 50
003F:0057 A10400
003F:005A 50
003F:005B AlOOOO
003F:005E 50
003F:005F 9AOOOOA700
003F:0064 A10200

MOV
MOV
PUSH
MOV
PUSH
MOV
PUSH
CALL
MOV

Word Ptr [0004],AX
AX,Word Ptr [0002]
AX
AX,Word Ptr [0004]
AX
AX,Word Ptr [0000]
AX
OOA7:0000
AX,Word Ptr [0002]

006F:0070 53 55 42 41 4C 4C 4F 43-53 55 42 41 4C 4C 4F 43
>d es:OxlffO
006F: lFFO 53 55 42 41 4C 4C 4F 43-53 55 42 41 4C 4C 4F 43
006F:2000 53 55 42 41 4C 4C 4F 43-00 00 FC lF 52 59 20 20
006F:2010 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F:2020 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F 2030 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F 2040 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F 2050 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
006F 2060 4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20-4D 45 4D 4F 52 59 20 20
>

·-----··----j
SUBALLOCSUBALLOC
SUBALLOCSUBALLOC
SUBALLOC .... RY
MEMORY MEMORY
MEMORY MEMORY
MEMORY MEMORY
MEMORY MEMORY
MEMORY MEMORY
MEMORY MEMORY

(b)

Figure 3.16 Facsimile CodeView output, illustrating (a) end of memory block for original
allocation and (b) end of suballocated block with offset of 8 bytes. Cursor located in
hidden portion of screen. (Courtesy of the Microsoft Corporation.)

Sec. 3.3

Multitasking

129

3.3 MULTITASKING
A major OS/2 enhancement (over DOS) is the ability to execute multiple tasks and
segregate each task's parameter space so that no mixing occurs. The OS/2 implementation relies heavily on 80286 (and 80386) Protected Mode hardware features.
Two threads, which exist as single entities with shared system resources, exist as
stand-alone modules with their own system resources and can execute as separate
tasks in Protected Mode. In this section we examine briefly the creation of threads
and processes.
3.3.1 Semaphores

Before beginning our examination of task generation, however, it is necessary to
consider synchronization. Assume, for example, that a given task depends on the
outcome of a second task at some point in the first task's execution. Clearly, when
the first task is started it must be synchronized with the second task to ensure that
the proper data become available when needed. If no requirement for synchronization exists, the two tasks can execute independently and are said to be asynchronous
with respect to each other.
A very important mechanism for achieving synchronization is the semaphore:
RAM semaphores and system semaphores are considered in this book. A typical
prescription for creating and accessing a RAM semaphore within a process (two
threads) is as follows:

Thread 1
@DosSemSet sem_handle
call to 2nd thread
@DosSemWait sem_handle,-1

Thread 2
activity to be synchronized
@DosSemClear sem_handle

Here the semaphore is set and the second thread called. Meanwhile the first thread
waits for the semaphore to clear. When the second thread clears the semaphore, the
first thread resumes execution. Only a handle, sem_handle, is used to pass information about the semaphore. This can be passed to a second independently compiled
(or assembled) process via a shared memory area; however, in the illustration above
it has been assumed that both threads are common to the same process and
sem_handle appears in the process data area (as a double word).

130

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

System semaphores are used commonly between diverse processes and have
the following general form:
Data area 1
no_excl
aseml
sem_hdll
no_to

dw
db
dd
dd

1
'\SEM\SDAT.DAT,0
0

-1

:no exclusive
: semaphore name
:handle
:no time out

Process 1
@DosCreateSem
@DosSemSet

no_excl,
sem hdll

sem_ hdl 1,

aseml

call to execute 2nd process
@DosSemWait

sem_hdll,no_to

and
Data area 2
aseml
sem_hdll
no_to

db
dd
dd

'\SEM\SDAT.DAT',0
0

-1

: semaphore common name
:handle
:no time out

Process 2
@DosOpenSem

sem_hdll,aseml

activity to be synchronized
@DosSemClear

sem_hdll

We see that the contrast between the two types is that system semaphores require a
name and hence can be accessed from disjoint segments. RAM semaphores simply
require a common handle. Fast-safe RAM semaphores are used by dynalink libraries.

3.3.2 Creating a Thread
Figure 3.17a is the flowchart for a program that generates two threads using RAM
semaphores for synchronization. Figure 3.17b shows the actual code used in this
process. The first thread clears the screen, writes message msg_pO to the display,

Sec. 3.3

131

Multitasking

SETUP
DATA

CLEAR
SCREEN

WRITE TTY
MESSAGE#1

BEEP#1

SET
SEMAPHORE

CREATE
THREAD#2

BEEP#2

WRITE TTY
MESSAGE#2

CLEAR
SEMAPHORE

WAIT CLEAR
SEMAPHORE

EXIT

Figure 3.17a Flowchart for a program
that generates two threads using RAM
semaphores for synchronization.

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

132

PAGE 55,132
TITLE CKTHl -- Check thread generation (ckthl.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This routine verifies that a thread is
generated •
• sall
.xlist
INCL_BASE equ l
include os2def.inc
include bse.inc
.list
errorl

macro

local ERROR12
or ax,ax
jz ERROR12
jmp ERRORll
ERROR12:
endm
dgroup

GROUP

data

STACKl

SEGMENT WORD
STACK
dw
1024 dup(?)
stklend equ
$
STACKl ENDS

'STACKl'

;Stack for threadl

STACK

'STACK'

;Stack for main program

STACK

SEGMENT WORD
STACK
dw
1024 dup(?)
ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'DATA'

result
action

dw
equ

msg_po

db
db
db

lmsg_po equ
msg_pl

db
db

db
lmsg_pl equ
msg_p2

db
db
db

lmsg_p2 equ

;Exit code from main
;Action code from main

0

l

'This is the main OS/2 thread'
ODH
OAH
$-msg_pO

;Carriage return
;Line feed
;Length message zero

'This is a separate OS/2 thread'
ODH
;Carriage return
;Line feed
OAH
$-msg_pl
;Length message one
'An error occurred on thread open'

ODH
OAH
$-msg_p2

;Carriage return
;Line feed

0

:Video handle

;Length message two

I

viohdl

equ

freq
duration

dw
dw

5000
500

15000 Hz
;500 msec

Thread 1 parameters

prgmadd

dd

threadl

;Address threadl

Figure 3.17b Program illustrating two threads that use RAM semaphores for
synchronization. The speaker is beeped and a message written.

Chap. 3

Sec. 3.3

133

Multitasking

atk adrl
thread ID
thdl_exit_code

dd
dw
dw

atklend

thd seml
sem-hdll
no_to

dd
dd
dd

thd_seml
-1

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

23

End STACKl
threadl I.D.
Thread l exit code

0
0

;Semaphore threadl
;Address thd_seml
;No time out

0

;

tr
le
br
re
no line
blank

;Top row screen
;Left corner
;Bottom row

0
0

;Riqht corner
;Number blanked lines
;Blank attribute

79

25
0007H

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 1 CODE 1
assume cs:CSEG,ds:dqroup,ss:STACK
PROC
FAR

OS21

call

els

@VioWrtTTY
errorl

msq_pO,lmsq_pO,viohdl

;Write message one

@DosBeep
errorl

freq,duration

;Beep speaker

@Dossemset
errorl

aem_hdll

;Set RAM semaphore
prqmadd,threadID,atk_adrl

@DoscreateThread
errorl
jmp CONT
ERRORll:
@VioWrtTTY
jmp ENDD

maq_p2,lmsq_p2,viohdl

;Write error message

@Dossemwait

sem_hdll,no_to

;Wait for semaphore clear

CONT:

ENDO:

@DosExit action,reault
OS21

;Exit

ENDP

;

threadl PROC

FAR

@DosBeep

freq, duration

;Beep speaker

@VioWrtTTY

msq_pl,lmsq_pl,viohdl

;Write message two

@DosSemClear

sem_hdll

;Clear semaphore

.

@DosExit action,thdl_exit_code

els

PROC

;Exit threadl

threadl ENDP
NEAR

@VioScrollUp

tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl

Figure 3.17b (Continued)

134

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

ret
els

ENDP

CSEG

ENDS
END

0621

Figure 3.17b (Concluded)

beeps the speaker, sets a semaphore, turns on threadl, waits for the semaphore to
clear, and exits the process. The second thread, threadl, beeps the speaker, writes
msg_pl to the display, clears the semaphore, and exits threadl. Synchronization is
needed because both threads access the display and collisions will result if they run
asynchronously.
Figure 3.18a is the flowchart for a program that generates random boxes to the
screen, one at a time. The program creates a box of random size (again, in our
constraint of 200 x 200 pixels for CGA mode), erases the box, and continues ( creating and erasing boxes). The box creation occurs as a separate thread running
asynchronously from the main thread. The main thread, once having turned on the
box generator thread, simply waits for a keyboard input to terminate the process.
Both threads run as part of the same process.
The program code is presented in Figure 3.18b, where the main thread clears
the screen, sets CGA mode and clears the screen again, locks the display and gets
a selector to the physical screen buffer, beeps the speakers, turns on threadl, and
waits for a keyboard input. Following a keyboard input, the screen is unlocked,
standard mode resumed (80 x 25), the screen cleared again, and the process exited.
Meanwhile the second thread, once started, first beeps the speaker and then
enters an infinite loop. Within this loop a set of random box corners are generated
and the box drawn on the display, as indicated above, with a call to boxx. The pixel
(pel) attribute is set to unity for this call. Next, the box is erased by repeating the
call with the pixel attribute set to zero.
In general, the instruction
@DosExit action,

result

will stop both threads from executing when called from the parent. This happens
only in response to the keyboard input, which is sensed using @KbdStringln.
Figure 3.19 contains the support routines used by the box generating program:
boxx, clsCGA, wdot, lineh, and linev. Note that some of the routines are slightly
different from their counterparts given in GRAPHLIB.LIB (boxx is FAR, for example). Also, note that the second thread procedure is of distance attribute FAR
even though it is defined within the same segment as the main thread. This allows
the second thread to pass a full 32-bit address for its entry point. Multiple threads
within the same process should be used when the task in question is reasonably
simple and can be modularized within the same segment.

Sec. 3.3

Multitasking

135

SETUP
DATA

CLEAR
SCREEN

SET CGA MODE AND
CLEAR SCREEN

LOCK SCREEN
CONTEXT

GET SELECTOR
PHYSICAL BUFFER

BEEP#1

CREATE
THREAD
BEEP#2

WRITE TTY
MESSAGE#2

CLEAR
SEMAPHORE
KEYBOARD
HESITATE

UNLOCK
SCREEN

SET STD
MODE

CLEAR
SCREEN

EXIT

Figure 3.18a Flowchart for a program
that generates single random boxes
using multiple threads.

136

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

PAGE 55,132
TITLE UNOS251 - This is the calling OS/2 proqram (UNOS251.ASM)
DESCRIPTION: Thia program "single" random plots boxes in protected
mode. Graphics mode 05H is used to display the boxes. This routine
employs multithreadinq to generate the boxs which are
generated randomly (100 boxes in square 200 x 200) •
• 8087
EXTRN

boxx:FAR,clsCGA:FAR

PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC
PUBLIC

viohdl,CGAa,lmodeE,typeCGA,colCGA
txtcCGA,txtrCGA,hrCGA,vrCGA,STDlll,lmode80,type80,col80
txtc80,txtr80,hr80,vr8o,waitf,dstat,PVBptrl,bufstl,buflenl,physell
MASKl,MASKll,OFFSETl,four,xx,dummy,two,xxx,eighty,row,col
addressl,x,y,xb,xe,ya,yb,xxxx
.sall
.xlist
INCL_BASE equ 1
include os2def.inc
include bse.inc
.list

;

dgroup

GROUP

data

STACKl

SEGMENT WORD STACK 'STACKl'
dw
1024 dup(?)
stklend equ
$
STACKl ENDS
STACK
STACK

SEGMENT WORD STACK 'STACK 1
dw
1024 dup(?)
ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'DATA'

;Stack for thread

;

viohdl equ
result dw
action equ
actionl equ
tr
dw
le
dw
br
dw
re
dw
no line dw
blank
dw
CGAa
label
lmodeE dw
typeCGA db
colCGA db
txtcCGA dw
txtrcGA dw
hrCGA
dw
vrcGA
dw

0
0

1
0
0
0

23
79

25
0007H
FAR
12
OOOOOlllB
2

40
25
320
200

;Required video handle
;Completion code
;Terminates current thread
;Thread termination action
1Top row screen clear
;Left column screen clear
;Bottom row screen clear
;Right column screen clear
;Number lines scrolled
;Blank character pair
;Video mode structure-CGA
;Structure length
;Mode identifier
;Color option-Mode 5
;text characters/line-ignore
;text lines-ignore
;horizontal resolution
;vertical resolution

I

STDlll
label
lmode80 dw
type80 db
col80
db
txtc80 dw
txtr80 dw

FAR
12
OOOOOOOlB
4

80
25

;Video mode structure-80x25
;Structure lenqth
;Mode identifier-Mode 3+
;color option
;text characters/line
;text lines

Figure 3.18b Main program for the "single" random box routine.

Chap. 3

Sec. 3.3

Multitasking

hr80
vr80

dw
dw

kbd buf db
lkbd buf dw
iowait dw
kbdhdl equ
waitf
dstat

equ
db

137

;horizontal resolution
;vertical resolution

720

400
80
$-kbd_buf
0
0

;Screen waiting status
;Returned status

1

?

PVBl'trl label
buf stl dd
buflenl dd
physell dw

FAR
OB8000H
4000H

MASKl
db
MASK2
db
MASK22 db
MASKll dw
OFFSETl dw
four
dw
xx
dw
dummy
dw
two
db
xxx
db
eighty dw
zero
dw
one
dw
row
dw
col
dw
addressl
rndret db

?
OlH
OOH
OOOlH
2000H
4
?
?
2
?
80
0

x

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

y
Xb

xe
yb
ye

;Keyboard buffer
;Length keyboard buffer
;Wait for CR
;Keyboard handle

;Video buffer structure
;Start physical address
;Buffer length
;OS/2 screen buffer selector

0

;PEL byte mask

;PEL byte mask--do
;PEL byte mask--undo
;Odd/even row mask

;Odd row buffer offset
;PEL attribute parameter
;80287 dummy "pop"
;Output value

1

?
?
dw
?

?

;row
;column
;Address screen dot
;random no. returned
;Box col parameter
;Box row parameter

?
?
?
?
?
?

;Start column

;End column
;Start row
;End row
Second Thread Variables

;

rndl
prq:madd
stk adrl
threadID
xxxx
thdl_exit_code

dw
dd
dd
dw
db
dw

thd seml
sem-hdll
no to
freq
duration

dd
dd
dd
dw
dw

l
threadl
stklend
0

?,?,?,?
0
0
thd_seml
-1
5000
500

;random seed
;address thread
;end of thread stack
;thread ID
;box corner buffer
;threadl exit code
;Semaphore threadl
;Address thd_seml

;No time out
;frequency beep in Hz
;duration beep in millisec

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:CSEG,ds:dgroup,ss:STACK
PROC
FAR

OS21

call els

;clear screen

Figure 3.18b (Continued)

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

138

@VioSetMode CGAm,viohdl

;set CGA graphics mode

call clsCGA

;Clear CGA screen

@VioScrLock waitf,dstat,viohdl

;Lock screen context

@VioGetPhysBuf PVBPtrl,viohdl
push physell
pop es

;Get physical buff sel
;Save selector
;Load selector into es

freq,duration

@DosBeep

@DosCreateThread

;Beep speaker

prgmadd,threadID,stk_adrl

@KbdStringin kbd_buf,lkbd_buf ,iowait,kbdhdl

;hesitate

@VioScrUnlock viohdl

;Unlock screen

@VioSetMode STDm,viohdl

;SO x 25 alpha mode

call els
@DosExit action,result

0521

;Terminate process

ENDP

;

els

PROC

NEAR

@VioScrollUp tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl
els
xload

PROC

NEAR

;Clear upper register half

;al = start
;Load xb less than 199
;Clear upper register half

mov bl,al

yload

yload

;STD screen clear

ret
ENDP

mov bh,O

xload

Chap. 3

mov xb,bx
mov bh,O
mov bl,ah
mov xe,bx
ret
ENDP

;ah = end
;Load xe less than 199

PROC
NEAR
mov bh,O
mov bl,al
mov yb,bx
mov bh,O
mov bl,ah
mov ye,bx
ret
ENDP

threadl PROC

;Clear upper register half
;al = start

;Load yb less than 199
;Clear upper register half

;ah = end
;Load ye less than 199

FAR

@DosBeep

freq, duration

;Beep speaker

mov ax,one
mov rndl,ax

;random seed
;load r.n. parameter

lea bp,xxxx

;4 byte buffer

mov cx,4
mov di,O

;unterminated loop
;box corner count
;r.n. memory index

LOOPO:
LOOPOO:

Figure 3.18b (Continued)

Sec. 3.3

139

Multitasking

call ldmem

load random memory values
move r.n. into register

mov al,rndret

mov ds:(bp+di],al
inc di
loop LOOPOO

save r.n. in memory

mov al,ds: (bp)
mov ah,ds: [bp+l]
cmp ah, al
jne EELSEl

;1st r.n. value

mov al,170
mov ah, 180

call xload
jmp IIFl

increment r.n. memory index

;2nd r.n. value

;check 2nd different than 1st
;jump if not equal
;move in arbitrary value l.t. 200
;move in different value
;load xe and xb

EELSEl:
cmp ah,al

;check 2nd less than 1st

jle ELSEl
call xload
jmp IIFl

;if g.t. calculate xb and xe

;jump if less or equal

ELSEl:
mov bl,al

;2nd g.t. 1st -- swap
;swap

mov al,ah
mov ah,bl
call xload

;reload
;calculate xe and xb

IIFl:
mov al,ds: (bp+2]
mov ah,ds:[bp+3]
cmp ah,al
jne EELSE2
mov al,170

mov ah,180

call yload
jmp IIF2

;3rd r.n. value
;4th r.n. value

;check 3rd different than 4th
;jump if not equal
;move in arbitrary value l.t. 200
;move in different value
;load ye and yb

EELSE2:
cmp ah,al
jle ELSE2
call yload
jmp IIF2

;check 4th less than 3rd
;jump if less or equal
;if g.t. calculate yb and ye

ELSE2:
mov bl,al

mov al,ah
mov ah,bl

;3rd g.t. 4th -- swap
;swap
;reload

call yload

;calculate yb and ye

push xb

;preserve box parameters

IIF2:
push xe

push yb
push ye
mov al,MASK2
mov MASKl,al

;PEL value set
;load dummy

call boxx

;write box

pop ye
pop yb
pop xe
pop xb

;recall box parameters

mov al,MASK22

mov MASKl,al

;PEL value black
;load dummy

call boxx

;undo box

jmp LOOPO
@DosExit

;jump unterminated loop

actionl,thdl_exit_code

Figure 3.18b (Continued)

140

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

threadl ENDP
;

ldmem

PROC

NEAR

push ax
push bx
push dx

mov dx,o
mov ax,rndl

;load upper multiplicand

mov bx,2053

;multiplier

;load previous r.n.

mul bx
mov bx,13849
clc
add ax,bx
adc dx,o
mov bx,OFFFFH
div bx

;add lower order result
;add carry if needed
;load 2(16)-l
;calculate modulo

mov ax,dx

;mov remainder into ax

mov rndl,ax

;save r.n.
:scale r.n. less than 200
;clear upper dividend

mov bx,350

mov dx,o
div bx
mov ah,O

;save al

mov rndret,al

ldmem

;load additative constant

;returned value byte

pop dx
pop bx
pop ax
ret
ENDP

;

CSEG

ENDS
END

OS21

Figure 3.18b (Concluded)

3.3.3 Creating Another Process

When multiple processes are to be synchronized the system semaphores are appropriate. System semaphores provide a common link between the two processes
through the semaphore name. If RAM semaphores are used, the semaphore handle
must be shared with a common data element. Figure 3.20a illustrates a program that
generates two processes using system semaphores for synchronization. The semaphore name must be zero terminated and preceded by
'\SEM\ ••• '

In Figure 3.20b we illustrate this naming with a semaphore called
'\SEM\SDAT.DAT',

0

and given the variable name aseml.
The second process called by the program in Figure 3.20b is OS2P2.EXE, as

Sec. 3.3

141

Multitasking

PAGE 55,132
TITLE NNOS252 - Supplemental routines for box plotting (NNOS252.ASM)
DESCRIPTION: These routines set up box plots in CGA mode. Graphics
mode 05H is used to display the box. This set of routines
is called by box plottinq main routinea The boxes are created or
destroyed depending on MASKl value •
• 8087
.sall
.xlist
INCL_BASE equ l
include os2def.inc
include bse.inc
.list
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN
EXTRN

viohdl:WORD
CGAm:FAR,lmodeE:WORD,typeCGA:BYTE
colCGA:BYTE,txtcCGA:WORD,txtrCGA:WORD,hrCGA:WORD,vrCGA:WORD
STDm:FAR,lmode80:WORD,type80:BYTE,col80:BYTE,txtc80:WORD,txtr80:WORD
hr80:WORD,vr80:WORD
waitf:WORD,dstat:BYTE,PVBPtrl:FAR,bufstl:DWORD
buflenl:DWORD,physell:WORD,MASKl:BYTE,MASKll:WORD,OFFSETl:WORD
four:WORD,xx:WORD,dummy:WORD,two:BYTE,xxx:BYTE,eighty:WORD
row:WORD,col:WORD,addressl:WORD,x:WORD,y:WORD,xb:WORD,xe:WORD
yb:WORD,ye:WORD

CSEG
PUBLIC

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'CODE'
boxx,clsCGA
assume cs:CSEG
PROC
FAR

boxx

xb = x-begin,xe = x-end,yb

y-begin,ye

y-end

push ax
push bx
push ex
push dx
mov ax,xb
cmp ax,xe
jl ELSElO
xchg ax,xe

;Check xb l.t. xe
;Swap xb and xe

mov xb,ax

ELSElO:
mov ax,yb
cmp ax,ye
jl ELSEll
xchg ax,ye

;Check yb l.t. ye
; swap yb and ye

mov yb,ax

ELSEll:
mov ax,yb
mov y,ax

;Top box line

call lineh
mov ax,ye

;Draw top horizontal line
;Bottom box line

mov y,ax

call lineh
mov ax,xb

;Draw bottom horizontal line
;Left box line

mov x,ax

call linev
mov ax,xe
mov x,ax
call linev

;Draw left vertical line

;Right box line
;Draw right vertical line

Figure 3.19 Associated support routines for the "single" random box program.

142

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

pop dx
pop ex
pop bx
pop ax
boxx

ret
ENDP

I

claCGA

PROC

FAR

@ViOScrLock waitf,dstat,viohdl
@VioGetPhyaBuf PVBptrl,viohdl
push phyaell
pop ea

Get physical buffer
Screen selector
Load extra segment

mov bp,o
mov al,O

;Start offset zero
;Zero attribute-clear

mov ea: [bp] ,al

;Clear byte

inc bp
cmp bp,lF3FH
jle 001

;Check end 1st buffer

mov bp,2000H
mov al,o

;Offset 2nd buffer-odd
;Zero attribute-clear

mov ea: [bp] ,al
inc bp
cmp bp,3F3FH
jle 002

;Clear byte

@VioscrUnLock viohdl

;Unlock screen context

Lock screen context

001:

002:

claCGA

;Check snd 2nd buffer

ret
ENDP

;

wdot

PROC

NEAR

(col,row) • (x,y)
push ax
push bx
push ex
push dx
push bp
fild four
fild col
fprem
fistp xx
fistp dummy
mov al,3
mov bl,byte ptr xx
sub al,bl
mov ah,O
mul two
mov cl,al
mov al,HASKl
ahl al,cl
mov xxx,al

;Load stack with 4
;ST - col, ST(l)
4
;Modulo
;Store remainder in xx
;Pop stack

mov ax, row
shr ax,l
mov dx,o
mul eiqhty

;Beqin address calculation
;Divide row by 2
;Clear upper multiplicand

;(3 - coli 4)
;Clear upper multiplicand
;Shift value for PEL
;PEL color mask
;Shift to correct PEL
;Ster~ buffer value
I

Figure 3.19 (Continued)

Chap. 3

Sec. 3.3

143

Multitasking

mov bx,col
shr bx,l
shr bx,l
add ax,bx
mov addressl,ax

;Convert column value to bytes

;offset in ax
;Save offset base

;Check even/odd row
;Look for bit o set

mov ax,row

and ax,MASKll
cmp ax,O

jle ELSEl
mov ax,addressl

add ax,OFFSETl
jmp IFll

;add odd buffer offset

ELSEl:
mov ax,addressl

IFll:
mov bp,ax

mov al,xxx

;screen buffer address
;Attribute value for dot

cmp al,O

;check PEL black (O)

je CCC
or es: [bp] ,al
jmp DOD

;Write dot

mov es: [bp) ,al

;Clear PEL

CCC:
DOD:
pop bp
pop dx
pop ex
pop bx
pop ax
wdot
lineh

ret
ENDP
PROC

NEAR

y • row position, xb • beqin, xe • end

push ax
push bx
push ex
push dx

m.ov ax,y
cmp ax,199
jg LINEl
mov row,ax
jmp LINE2

Establish row for wdot
check row l.t. 199
jump if greater
load "row•

mov ax,180
m~v row,ax

;load arbitrary value l.t. 199

mov ax,xb

;Establish start column

mov col,ax
push ax
cap ax,319
jle LINE3
mov ax,319
mov col,ax

;Save column value
;check col less than 319
;jump i f 1. t.e. 319
;if greater load arbitrary value
;load "col"

LINEl:
LINE2:

;load "row"

DOlO:

LINE3:
call wdot
pop ax
inc ax
cmp ax,xe
jle DOlO

;Write dot (col,row)
;Recall column
;Increment column
;Check end horizontal line

Figure 3.19 (Continued)

144

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

pop dx
pop ex
pop bx
pop ax
lineh
linev

ret
ENDP
PROC

NEAR

x = col position, yb = begin, ye = end
push ax
push bx
push ex
push dx

mov ax,x
cmp ax,319
jg LLINEl
mov col,ax

Establish column for wdot
check col l.t. 319
jump if greater
load "col"

jmp LLINE2
LLINEl:
mov ax,319
mov col,ax

;greater therefore arbitrary value

mov ax,yb

;Establish start row

;load "col"

LLINE2:
0020:

mov row,ax
push ax

cmp ax,199

jle LLINEJ

;Save row value
;check row value q.t. 199

; jump if less

mov ax,199

;greater therefore arbitrary value

mov row,ax

;load "row"

LLINE3:
call wdot

;Write dot (col,row)

pop ax

;Recall row

inc ax
cmp ax,ye
jle 0020

;Increment row
;Check end vertical line

pop dx
pop ex
pop bx
pop ax
linev

ret
ENDP

CSEG

ENDS
END

Figure 3.19 (Concluded)

specified under prgrm_nm in the parameter list for @DosExecPgm. The process
indicated in Figure 3.20b clears the screen, writes msg_pO to the display, creates a
system semaphore with handle sem_hdll and name SDAT.DAT, beeps the speaker,
sets the semaphore, and turns on the second process. Following this, the process
waits for the system semaphore to clear and then terminates both the second proc-

Sec. 3.3

145

Multitasking
SETUP
DATA

CLEAR
SCREEN

WRITE TTY
MESSAGE

CREATE
SEMAPHORE

BEEP#1

SET
SEMAPHORE

CREATE
PROCESS#2
PROCESS#2
WAIT CLEAR
SEMAPHORE

KILL
PROCESS#2

EXIT

Figure 3.20a F1owchart for program
that generates two processes using
system semaphores.

ess and itself. Note that this main process accesses the screen at several points (els
and @VioWrtTTY).
Figure 3.21a illustrates the flowchart for the child process,
OS2P2.ASM, turned on by the program in Figure 3.20b. The supporting code is
shown in Figure 3.21b. The common semaphore name, '\SEM\SDAT.DAT', 0, is
again defined by a variable aseml (not related by symbol to the aseml appearing in

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

146

PAGE 55,132
TITLE CRPRl -- Check thread generation (ckprl.aem)
DESCRIPTION: This routine verifies that a process is
generated •
• sall
.xlist
INCL_BASE equ l
include os2def.inc

include bse.inc
.list
errorl

macro

local ERROR12
or ax,ax
jz ERROR12
jmp ERRORll
ERROR12:
endm
dgroup

GROUP

STACK
STACK

SEGMENT WORD
STACK
dw
1024 dup(?)
ENDS

data

DATA

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'DATA'

'STACK'

;Stack for main program

I

result
action

dw

0

equ

l

;Exit code from main
;Action code from main

msg__pO

db
db
db

'This is the main OS/2 thread'
ODH

;Carriaqe return

lmsg__po equ

$-msg__pO

;Line feed
;Length message zero

viohdl

0

;Video handle

equ

OAH

I

freq
duration

dw
dw

4000
500

14000 Hz
;500 msec

Semaphore l parameters
no excl

dw

1

as8m1

db

1

sem hdll
no_to

dd
dd

0
-1

;no exclusive
;Name system semaphore
;Address thd seml
;No time out-

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

0
0

;Left corner

\SEM\SDAT.DAT',O

I
I

tr
le
br
re
no line
blank

;Top row screen

23

;Bottom row

79

;Right comer
;Number blanked lines
;Blank attribute

25

00078

Process Created Parameters

Figure 3.20b Program that generates two processes using system semaphores.

Chap. 3

Sec. 3.3

147

Multitasking

obj_name_buf
lobj_name_buf

dd
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
db

a sync
argptr

envptr
pid

prgm_nm

10 dup(?)
$-obj_name_buf
1
0
0
?
?
1 0S2P2 .EXE I I 0

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:CSEG,ds:dgroup,ss:STACK
PROC
FAR

OS21

call

els

Process name buffer
length buffer
asynchronous operation
pointer arguments

environment pointer
process ID
;process name

;Clear screen

@VioWrtTTY
errorl

msg_pO,lmsg_pO,viohdl

;Write message

@Doscreatesem
errorl

no_excl,sem_hdll,aseml

;Create system semaphore

@Dos Beep

freq, duration

;Beep speaker

@OosSemSet

sem_hdll

;Set semaphore

errorl

;Create child process
@DosExecPgm obj_name_buf,lobj_name_buf,async,argptr,envptr,pid,prgm_nm
errorl
@DosSemWait

sem_hdll,no_to

;Wait for semaphore clear

@DosKillProcess 1,pid

;Terminate child process

@DosExit action,result

;Exit

ERROR11:
OS21

ENDP

els

PROC

NEAR

@VioScrollUp
els
CSEG

;Clear screen
tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl

ret
ENDP
ENDS
END

OS21

Figure 3.20b (Concluded)

148

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

SETUP
DATA

OPEN
SEMAPHORE

BEEP

WRITE TTY
MESSAGE

CLEAR

SEMAPHORE

Figure 3.21a Flowchart for a child
EXIT

process, illustrating synchronization
using system semaphores.

the parent). This child process opens the semaphore, beeps the speaker, writes a
message msg_pl to the display, and clears the semaphore. The process then terminates itself. Synchronization is needed because both processes access the display.
This very brief example presents the use of multiple processes that must be
synchronized. Earlier we used flags in a common data area to accomplish this with
the program that displayed 100 random boxes at once. The use of semaphores is a
more formal and elegant way to achieve synchronization and does not require
a constant polling of the flag to check for process completion. The system does this
for us.

Sec. 3.3

149

Multitasking

PAGE 55,132
TITLE OS2P2 -- Check thread generation (os2p2.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This routine verifies that a 2nd process is
qenerated.

It uses semaphores for synchronization .

• sall
.xlist
INCL_BASE equ l
include os2def.inc
include bse.inc
.list
errorl

macro

local ERROR12
or ax,ax
jz ERROR12
jmp ERR0Rl1
ERROR12:
endm
dgroup

GROUP

STACKl
STACKl

SEGMENT WORD
STACK
dw
1024 dup(?)
ENDS

DATAl

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'DATAl'

result
action

dw
equ

0
l

msg_pl

db
db
db

'This is a separate OS/2 process•
ODH
;carriage return
OAH
;Line feed
$-msg_pl
;Lenqth message one

lmsg_pl equ

datal
'STACKl'

;Stack for 2nd process

;Exit code from process
;Action code from process

;

viohdl

equ

freq
duration

0
dw
dw

;Video handle

5000
500

;5000 Hz
;500 msec

Semaphore parameters

aseml
sem hdll
no_to

db

'\SEM\SDAT.DAT',O

dd
dd

-1

0

DATAl

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:CSEG,ds:dgroup,ss:STACKl
PROC
FAR

OS2l

@DosOpenSem

;Semaphore name
;Address thd seml
;No time out-

sem_hdll,aseml

;Open system semaphore

freq,duration

;Beep speaker

errorl

@DosBeep
errorl

Figure 3.2lb Child process, illustrating synchronization using system semaphores.

150

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

@VioWrtTTY

msg_pl,lmsg_pl,viohdl

;Write message

sem_hdll

;Clear semaphore

Chap. 3

errorl

@DosSemClear
ERRORll:

@DosExit action,result

OS21
CSEG

ENDP
ENDS
END

;Exit process

OS21

Figure 3.2lb (Concluded)

3.4 INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATIONS

We have seen examples of interprocess communication (IPC) using shared memory
and semaphores. OS/2 has three additional mechanisms for achieving such communication: pipes, queues, and signals. Signals basically act like a hardware interrupt
and tend to reflect rather specialized interprocess communications [5]. We only
mention them. The dominant mechanisms we focus on in this book are the remaining four. Synchronization is a major requirement for processes competing for serial
mechanisms [6]. OS/2 solves this problem in a number of ways.
3.4.1 Pipes and Queues

A flowchart for a parent program that passes messages via pipes is illustrated in
Figure 3.22a. The code associated with the parent is presented in Figure 3.22b. This
program employs several IPC mechanisms in addition to pipes: semaphores, for
achieving synchronization, and shared memory, for passing the pipe handle and
message length. First the screen is cleared with a call to els. Next, the shared segment is created and this segment is arbitrarily large (512 words). The call to
@DosMakePipe creates the pipe with a read handle, read_hdl, and a write handle,
write_hdl. The parameter pflag specifies the pipe length in bytes.
Note that a pipe is anonymous in this context and serves simply as a highspeed buffer area with no name. A system semaphore is created, the speaker beeped,
the message msg_pO written to the pipe buffer using write_hdl, the semaphore set,
and a child process executed. The parent then waits for the child to execute and
clear the semaphore before it terminates the child and exits.
Figure 3.23a presents the flowchart for the child process. Figure 3.23b contains
the code for this process. Initially, the child opens the semaphore, beeps the speaker,
and gets a selector to the shared segment. This shared segment is used to obtain a

Sec. 3.4

Interprocess Communications

151

SETUP
DATA

CREATE SHARED
SEGMENT

CREAT
PIPE

PIPE READ HANDLE IN
SHARED SEGMENT

CREATE
SEMAPHORE

BEEP

WRITE MESSAGE
TO PIPE

SET
SEMAPHORE

CREATE
CHILD
CHILD
PROCESS
WAIT CLEAR
SEMAPHORE

KILL
PROCESS

EXIT

Figure 3.22a Flowchart for a main
program that examines pipes for
interprocess communication.

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

152

PAGE 55,132
TITLE PIPEST -- Check pipe generation (pipest.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This routine verifies that a pipe is
generated •
• sall
.xlist

errorl

INCL_BASE equ 1
include os2def.inc
include bse.inc

.list
macro
local ERROR12
or ax,ax
jz ERROR12
jmp ERRORll

ERROR12:

endm

I

dgroup

GROUP

STACK

SEGMENT WORD
STACK
dw
1024 dup(?)
ENDS

STACK

data
'STACK'

;Stack for main program

I

DATA

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'DATA'

;

result
action

dw
equ

0

msg_pO

db
db
db

'This is the OS/2 pipe message•
ODH
;carriage return
OAH
;Line feed
;Lenqth messaqe zero
$-msg_pO

lmsg_pO equ

;Exit code from main
;Action code from main

1

;

viohdl

equ

;Video handle

0

I

freq
duration

dw
dw

4000

;4000 Hz

500

;500 msec

Semaphore 1 parameters
no_excl
aseml
se11 hdll
no_to

1

db
dd

'\SEM\SDAT.DAT',0
0

;Address

dd

-1

;No time out

dw
dw

0

;Top row screen
;Left corner
;Bottom row
;Right corner
;Number blanked lines
;Blank attribute

I

tr
le
br
re
no line
blank

;no exclusive
;Name system semaphore

dw

0

dw

23

dw
dw
dw

79

25
0007H

Process Created Parameters

Figure 3.22b Pipe main program.

Chap. 3

Interprocess Communications

Sec. 3.4

obj_nama_buf
lobj_name_buf
aaync

argptr
envptr
pid

,

prgm_nm

153

dd
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

10 dup(?)
$-obj_name_buf

Process name buffer
length buffer

1
0
0

asynchronous operation

db

'PIPECL.EXE' ,O

pointer arCJlllllents
environment pointer
process ID

?
?

;process name

Pipe Parameters
;

read hdl
write_hdl
pflag
bytas_writtan

dw
dw
dw
dw

rPipe read handle
;Pipe write handle
;Pipe length in bytes
;bytes written to pipe

?
?
256
?

Shared Memory Parameters
;

maize
dw
maall
dw
ahrnama db

512
?
'\SHAREMEM\SDATl.DAT',O

zero
one

0

dw
dw

1

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 1 CODE 1
assume cs:CSEG,de:dgroup,ss:STACK
PROC
FAR

OS21

call

;Shared buffer size
;Shared selector
;Shared buffer name

;Clear screen

els

@DoaAllocShrSag msiza,shrname,msell
errorl
push msall
pop as
mov bp, zero

;preserve selsctor
;selector in extra segment
;index equal O

@DoaMakaPipe raad_hdl,writa_hdl,pflag
errorl
mov ax,raad hdl
mov es:[bp+2],ax

;transfer read handle
;handle in extra segment

;Create pipe

@DosCraatasem
errorl

no_excl,sem_hdll,aseml

rcraata system semaphore

@DosBeap

fraq,duration

rBeep speaker

@DosWrite write_hdl,msg__pO,lmsg__pO,bytas_writtan
errorl
mov ax,bytas_writtan
rtransfer massage length
;length in buffer
mov as:[bp+4],ax
@DosSemSat
errorl

sem_hdll

;Set semaphore

Figure 3.22b (Continued)

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

154

Chap. 3

;Create child process
@DosExecPgm obj_name_buf,lobj_name_buf,async,arqptr,envptr,pid,prqm_nm
error1

@Dos5emWait

sem_hdll,no_to

;Wait for-semaphore clear

@DosKillProcess 1,pid

;Terminate child process

@DosExit action,result

;Exit

ERRORll:
;

0521

ENDP

els

PROC

NEAR

@Vio5crol1Up
els
CSEG

;Clear screen
tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,blank,viohdl

ret
ENDP
ENDS
END

0521

Figure 3.22b (Concluded)

SETUP
DATA

OPEN
SEMAPHORE

BEEP

ADDRESS SHARED
SEG. FOR PIPE HANDLE

READ MESSAGE #1
FROM PIPE

WRITETIY
MESSAGE#1

CLEAR
SEMAPHORE

EXIT

Figure 3.23a Flowchart for a child
process that illustrates pipes used for
interprocess communications.

Sec. 3.4

155

Interprocess Communications

PAGE 55,132
TITLE PIPECL -- Check pipe generation (pipecl.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This routine verifies that a pipe is
qenerated. It uses semaphores for synchronization .
• sall
.xlist
INCL_BASE equ 1
include os2def.inc
include bse.inc
.list

errorl

macro
local ERROR12
or ax,ax
jz ERROR12
jmp ERRORll

ERROR12:
endm
dgroup

GROUP

STACKl

SEGMENT WORD
STACK
dw
1024 dup(?)
ENDS

STACKl

datal
'STACK1 1

DATAl

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'DATAl'

result

dw
equ
equ

action
viohdl

freq
duration

0
1
0
dw
dw

;Stack for 2nd process

;Exit code from process
;Action code from process

;Video handle
5000
500

;5000 Hz
;500

msec

Semaphore parameters

aseml

db
dd
dd

sem_hdll
no_to

zero

dw

'\SEM\SDAT.DAT',O

;Semaphore name

0

;Address
;No time out

-1

0

Shared Buff er Parameters
shrsel dw
shrname db

;selector

'\SHAREMEM\SDATl.DAT',O

;buffer name

Pipe Parameters
read hdl
lmsgbuffer

dw
dw
db

?
?
256 dup(?)

;read handle
;length message
;buffer length

Figure 3.23b Routine for a child process, illustrating pipes for interprocess
communications.

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

156

bytes_read

;actual bytes read

?

dw

DATAl

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:CSEG,ds:dqroup,ss:STACKl
PROC
FAR

OS21

@DosopenSem

Chap. 3

sem_hdll,aseml

;Open system semaphore

freq, duration

;Beep speaker

shrname,shrsel

;shared segment

errorl
@DosBeep

errorl
@OosGetShrSeg
errorl
push shrsel
pop es
mov bp,zero
mov ax,es:[bp+2]

;preserve selector

;load extra segment
;initialize index
;read handle

mov read hdl,ax
mov ax,es:[bp+4J
mov lmsg,ax

;specified
;message length

;specified

@DosRead read_hdl,buffer,lmsg,bytes_read
errorl
@VioWrtTTY

buffer,lmsg,viohdl

;Write message

sem_hdll

;Clear semaphore

errorl
@DosSemClear
ERRORll:

@DosExit action,result
OS21
CSEG

ENDP
ENDS
END

;Exit process

OS21

Figure 3.23b (Concluded)

read handle and the message length for the pipe. The pipe is then read using
@DosRead and the message loaded into buffer. The display is then updated with the
message content using
@VioWrtTTY buffer,

lmsg,

yiohdl

where lmsg is the message length in bytes and viohdl the display handle. It is this
access of the display that requires synchronization with the parent.
Following the message write to the screen, the semaphore is cleared and
the child process terminates execution. The key step in this code was to
ensure that common pipe link exists between the routines. Unlike the semaphore link, which uses a commonly named area ('\SEM\SDAT.DAT',O) across both
the child and parent, the pipe handle was passed via a common memory area
('\SHAREMEM\SDAT1.DAT' ,0).

Sec. 3.4

Interprocess Communications

157

Figure 3.24a illustrates the main process for a set of programs that demonstrate
queue operation. Figure 3.24b presents the associated code for this parent process.
The process opens with a call to @DosCreateQueue. The common link between the
child and parent is the queue name, '\QUEUES\QDAT.DAT',O. This call returns a
queue handle, q_hdl. The speaker is beeped and a child process (named
'QUEUECL.EXE') turned on. The queue is used to pass a 32-bit buffer address
from the child process to the parent. The selector value of this address is loaded into
es and the offset into bx. This buffer address is contained in the double word
bufferl.
SETUP
DATA

CREATE
QUEUE

BEEP

CREATE
PROCESS
PROCESS
READ QUEUE
BUFFER ADDRESS

TRANSFER QUEUE
BUFFER DATA TO
PARENT BUFFER

FREE QUEUE
BUFFER AREA

CLOSE
QUEUE

WRITETIY
MESSAGE

KILL
PROCESS

EXIT

Figure 3.24a Flowchart for a main
program, illustrating queues for
interprocess communications.

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

158

Chap. 3

PAGE 55,132
TITLE QUEUEST -- Check queue generation (queuest.asm)

DESCRIPTION: This routine verifies that a queue is
generated.

;suppresses macro lists

.sall

.xlist
INCL_BASE equ l

include os2def.inc
include bse.inc
.list

errorl

;suppresses source list
;sets IBM macro flag
;os2 definitions
;Dos,Vio,Mou, & Kbd
;turns list on

;exit macro
;local macro label
;set ax bits
;jump if zero next instruction
;otherwise exit process

macro
local ERROR12

or ax,ax
jz ERROR12
jmp ERRORll
ERROR12:

;end macro

endm

;data and extra group

dgroup

GROUP

STACK
STACK

SEGMENT WORD
STACK
dw
1024 dup(?)
ENDS

DATA

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'DATA'

result
action

dw
equ

viohdl

equ

freq

duration
selector

data
1

STACK 1

;Exit code from main
;Action code from main

0
l

;Video handle

0
dw
dw
dw

;Stack for main program

4000
500
?

;4000 Hz
;500 msec
;allocated segment selector

Process Created Parameters
obj_name_buf
lobj_name_buf

a sync
argptr

envptr
pid
prgm_nm

dd
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
db

10 dup(?)
$-obj_name_buf
l
0
0

?,?
'QUEUECL.EXE',O

;Process name buffer
;length buffer

;asynchronous operation
;pointer arguments
;environment pointer
;process ID
;process name

Queue Parameters
q__hdl
q__prty

dw
dw

?

;Queue handle

0

q_name
request

db

'\QUEUES\QDAT.DAT',O

dd
dw
dd
dw

0
0
0
0

;Queue ordering priority
;name
;Read request parameter
;Element read priority
;semaphore
;element code

el_prty

a semi
el_code

Figure 3.24b Main program illustrating queues.

159

Interprocess Communications

Sec. 3.4

no wait

dw
dw
dd
db

lmsg
buff erl
buff er

0

?
0

256 dup(?)

DATA

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:CSEG,ds:dgroup,ss:STACK
PROC
FAR

OS21

@DosCreateQueue q_hdl,q_prty,q_name

wait processing
message length--read
queue buffer address
read buffer

;Create queue

errorl
@DosBeep

freq,duration

;Beep speaker

;Create child process
@DosExecPgm obj_name_buf,lobj_name_buf,async,argptr,envptr,pid,prgm_nm
errorl
;read queue buffer area
@DosReadQueue q__hdl,request,lmsg,bufferl,el_code,no_wait,el_prty,asemi

errorl
mov bx,word ptr bufferl
mov ax,word ptr bufferl+2

;child buffer 32-bit address
;selector

mov selector,ax
push selector

pop es

;extra segment register
;load data buffer address
;count limit
;count index

lea bp,buffer
mov cx,lmsg
mov di,O

LOOPl:
;transfer from queue area
;transfer to ds buffer
;increment index

mov al,es:[bx+di]

mov ds:(bp+di],al
inc di
loop LOOPl
@DosFreeSeg
errorl

selector

;free allocated segment

@DosCloseQueue

q_hdl

;close queue

@VioWrtTTY buffer,lmsg,viohdl
errorl

;write message to screen

@DosKillProcess l,pid

;Terminate child process

@DosExit action,result

;Exit

ERRORll:
OS21
CSEG

ENDP
ENDS
END

OS21

Figure 3.24b (Concluded)

Next, the length of the buffer is loaded into a loop counter. This value, lmsg,
was retrieved from the child process along with bufferl using an @DosReadQueue
call. The contents of the buffer pointed to by bufferl are loaded into the buffer, and
the segment area pointed at by selector, the segment address associated with the
pointer, bufferl, is released. This segment was allocated previously, during execution of the child process, as we shall see shortly. The queue is closed and the message in buffer written to the screen. Finally, the child is terminated and the parent
exits back to OS/2.

160

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

Figure 3.25a shows the flowchart for the associated child process and Figure
3.25b the corresponding code. The child opens with a beep to the speaker alerting
the user that the child has started. Next, the queue is opened (note that the queue
name represents the common link between the two processes. At this point the
child allocates a segment using @DosAllocSeg. The size of the segment equals the
message length and it is a giveable segment (aseg_give=l). The segment allocated
has a selector returned ( q_w) which is loaded into es and the contents of the message written to this buffer. The speaker is beeped with a slightly different tone,
@DosGiveSeg executed (which returns a selector that can be given back to the
parent, q_rr), and the 16-bit read selector loaded into the segment portion of a 32bit pointer to the giveable segment (q_r).
A macro @DosWriteQueuel has been defined at the beginning of the program
and this macro has the fifth statement as pushing a 32-bit value (not address) onto
the stack prior to the call to DOSWRITEQUEUE. This macro is called to transfer

SETUP
DATA

BEEP #1

OPEN
QUEUE

ALLOCATE QUEUE
BUFFER AREA

LOAD
MESSAGE

BEEP #2

PERMIT ACCESS TO
QUEUE BUFFER

CLOSE
QUEUE

EXIT

Figure 3.25a Flowchart for a child
process, illustrating queues for
interprocess communications.

Sec. 3.4

Interprocess Communications

161

PAGE 55,132
TITLE QUEUECL -- Check queue generation (queuecl.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This routine verifies that a queue is
generated. It uses semaphores for synchronization.

;suppress macro listing

.sall
.xlist
INCL_BASE equ 1
include os2def.inc
include bse.inc
.list
errorl

macro
local ERROR12

;suppress source list
;set IBM macro flag
;include os2 macros
;Dos,Vio,Mou, & Kbd
;turn list on

jz ERROR12
jmp ERRORll

;exit macro
;local macro label
;set ax
;jump to next instruction
:exit

endm

;end macro

or ax,ax
ERROR12:

;Corrected macro
@DosWriteQueuel macro
handle,request,length,data,prty
@define DOSWRITEQUEUE
::define API call
; ;push word handle
@pushw handle
@pushw request
;;push word request
@pushw length
; ;push buffer length
@pushd data
;;push 32-bit address
@pushw prty
;;push priority
far ptr DOSWRITEQUEUE
;;call API function
call
endm
;load ds and es

dgroup

GROUP

STACKl

SEGMENT WORD
STACK
dw
1024 dup(?)
ENDS

STACKl

datal

DATAl
:
result
action

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC

freq
freql

dw
dw
dw

dw
equ

duration

I

1

STACK1 1

;Stack for 2nd process

DATAl I

;Exit code from process
:Action code from process

0
l

5000
2000
500

;5000 Hz
:2000 Hz
;500 msec

Queue Parameters

;queue handle
;process ID--queue creator
;name
:write request parameter
:priority message 1

q_hdl
q_pid
q_name
request
prtyo

dw
dw

msg_po db
lmsg_pO dw

'This is a priority 1 message',ODH,OAH
$-msg_pO
;length

db

dw
dw

?
?
'\QUEUES\QDAT.DAT 1 ,0
0
0

Figure 3.2Sb The child process, illustrating queues for interprocess
communications.

162

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

Chap. 3

Allocated Segment/Queue Parameters
q_w
aseg_give
q_r
q_rr

dw
dw
dd
dw

;queue write selector
;allocated segment giveable
;queue read 32-bit pointer
;queue read selector

0

1
0

?

DATAl

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'CODE'
assume cs:CSEG,ds:dgroup,ss:STACKl
PROC
FAR

OS21

freq, duration

@Dos Beep
errorl

;Beep speaker

@DosOpenQueue q_pid,q_hdl,q_name
errorl

;open queue

@DosAllocSeg
errorl

;allocate segment

lmsg_pO,q_w,aseg~give

push q_w
pop es
lea bx,msg_pO
mov cx,lmsg_pO
mov di,o

;allocated segment selector
;pop to extra segment register
;offset of message
;loop count=message length
;zero index

mov al,ds:(bx+di]
mov es:(di],al
inc di
loop LOOPl

;transfer message
;message to extra segment
;increment index

push ds
pop es

;reload ds to stack
;es=ds

LOOPl:

@Dos Beep
errorl

freql,duration

;2nd beep

@DosGiveseg
errorl

q_w,q_pid,q_rr

;get selector

lea bx,q_r
mov ax,q_rr
mov ds:(bx+2],ax

;32-bit read address
;16-bit read selector
;load read address
;write address to queue
@DosWriteQueuel q_hdl,request,lmsg_pO,q_r,prtyO
errorl
@DosFreeseg
errorl

q_w

;free allocated segment

@DosCloseQueue
errorl

q_hdl

;close queue

@DosExit action,result

;Exit process

ERRORll:
OS21
CSEG

ENDP
ENDS
END

OS21

Figure 3.2Sb (Concluded)

Sec. 3.5

Summary

163

the 32-bit pointer to the allocated segment, back to the parent process via the queue.
Also transferred with this call is the message length. Finally, the segment is set free
for selector q_w. The queue is closed next and the child exits back to the OS/2.
3.4.2 Shared Memory Segments

In several cases among the preceding examples the processes involved employed
shared memory segments. There were generally two types of mechanisms employed:
giveable segments created using @DosAllocSeg or true shared segments created
using @DosAllocShrSeg. Both of these approaches lead to a common sharing of a
memory segment. These segments were used to transfer commonly needed information so that two independent (although possibly synchronized) processes could establish a link. It is this need for some sort of common memory reference that characterizes all IPC, and shared memory is a very effective way to achieve this.

3.5 SUMMARY
In this chapter we have looked at memory management, multitasking, and interprocess communications. The goal has been to establish for the reader an introduction to these techniques, with representative examples used to illustrate the mechanisms involved. A major attribute of OS/2 is the ability to access huge segments
(greater than 64K). This was demonstrated in Section 3.2.4.
Multitasking is a cornerstone of the operating system. As programming strategies change from the single-threaded way of doing business common throughout the
1980s to more parallel approaches, OS/2 can be expected to move to the forefront
of microcomputer operating systems. It must be recognized that multitasking requires
a rethinking of how programs are structured in order to be able to take advantage of
this feature. Programmers must begin to think in terms of how a given application
can be subdivided so that the application can be run efficiently in a multitasked
environment. This is a very nontrivial change in programming concept. Without the
common availability of well-supported multitasking operating systems, it is, of
course, impossible to begin the process of rethinking program structure to fit the
multitasking mold. Hence OS/2 truly represents a transition in programming philosophy for the applications programmer. Fortunately, it has a great deal of commonality with earlier systems such as DOS and the Windows executive, and consequently,
represents a relatively fluid vehicle for many programmers to enter the world of
multitasking.
In Section 3.3 we discussed semaphores, multiple threads, and multiple processes, all essential to a comprehensive multitasking environment. The semaphores
treated consisted of two types: RAM and system (with a third being fast-RAM). In
Section 3.4 we described the basic vehicles for interprocess communications, which
had been alluded to earlier, and illustrated the use of pipes and queues. Shared
memory segments were discussed throughout the chapter and signals were mentioned briefly.

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

164

Chap. 3

REFERENCES
1. Intel iAPX 286 Programmer's Reference Manual, Intel Corporation, Santa Oara, CA,
1985.
2. Motorola Corporation, MC68000/MC68008/MC68010/MC68HCOOO 8-/16-/32-Bit Microprocessors User's Manual, 6th ed., Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Qiffs, NJ, 1989.
3. McCracken, D. D., A Guide to PLM Programming for Microcomputer Applications,
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, MA, 1978, p. 43.
4. Godfrey, J. T., Applied C: The IBM Microcomputers, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1990.
5. Duncan, R.,Advanced OS/2 Programming, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1989,
p. 271.
6. Tanenbaum, A S., Operating Systems: Design and Implementation, Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1987, p. 51.

PROBLEMS
3.1 IBM supplies a number of device drivers with the OS/2 libraries. They have extension
.SYS. The floppy and fixed disk driver for the IBM PC/AT is called DISKOl.SYS,
and the driver for the inport Microsoft Mouse is MOUSEA04.SYS, for example (see
reference 5, p. 14). What level of protection would you expect these drivers to have?
Why?
3.2 Throughout this book the IBM (and Microsoft) macros have been used to access the
API services. Typical of these is the call

@DosExit

action,

result

which executes the macro code

@DosExit

macro
@define
@pushw
@pushw
call
endm

action, result
DOSEXIT
action
result
far ptr DOSEXIT

where @define and @pushw are defined as

@define

and

macro
ifndef
extrn
endif
endm

callname
callname
callnamezfar

165

Problems
@pushw

macro
mov
push
endm

parm
ax,parm
ax

What are the advantages and disadvantages of this approach. Consider, for example,
maintenance and clarity of code.
3.3 When using @DosAllocSeg, what must occur for the segment to be created to be
giveable? To be discardable?
3.4 When accessing a huge segment, what is essential to achieving operation that ensures
no violation of protection?
3.5 What is the dominant feature of interprocess communications that must hold in any
multitasking implementation?
3.6 When would you be likely to use RAM semaphores for interprocess communications?
To use system semaphores?
3.7 In @DosWriteQueue why must the fourth macro parameter be pushed with @pushd
not @pushs? Here
@pushs

macro pa rm
mov ax,SEG parm
push ax
lea ax,parm
push ax
endm

while
@pushd

macro parm
push ds
push bx
mov ax, SEG parm
mov bx, OFFSET parm
push word ptr [bx]
mov ax, [bx+2]
push bp
push sp
pop bp
xchg [ bp+6] , ax
pop bp
mov ds,ax
pop ax
pop bx
push ax
endm

3.8 When a child process, that is, using semaphores for interprocess communications,
completes the execution of a critical area of code, how does it signal the parent?

166

Memory Management and Multitasking with Assembler

3.9

Suppose that two processes involve no IPC and contain such code fragments as:

Chap. 3

Process 1
@DosExecPgm •••
@errorl
@DosBeep

freql,duration

and

Process 2
OS21

PROC

OS21

@DosBeep freq2, duration
@DosExit action,result
ENDP

FAR

What are the potential consequences of such code?
What is the major difference between a pipe and a queue as used in this chapter?
Compare the various IPC mechanisms.
When would you use a shared segment as opposed to a giveable segment?
Outline the API calls for pipe operation using a child process.
Outline the API calls for queue operation using a child process.
How is an intraprocess thread differentiated from an interprocess thread? What is
preferred for a second task?
3.16 Discuss the usage of DosAllocSeg and DosReAllocSeg in comparison to the use of
DosSubAlloc.

3.10
3.11
3.12
3.13
3.14
3.15

PART Ill
Advanced OS/2 Kernal Programming

4 OS/2 and C

There are a number of C compilers available; however, two that run under OS/2
Protected Mode are the Microsoft C 5.1 Optimizing Compiler [1] and IBM's C/2
Version 1.1 [2]. In this book we use the former compiler. Together with the include
files for the assembler (the .inc files), the IBM Toolkit [3] provides a set of C
include files (.h files) that contain macros for accessing the Applications Program
Interface (API) and Presentation Manager (PM) services. There are some significant
difference's between the Version 1.0 and 1.1 Toolkit files, particularly in the definition of the structures used by API service calls. We will adhere to the Version 1.1
definitions; the interested reader is referred elsewhere for the Version 1.0 definitions
[4]. The purpose of this chapter is to introduce C programming in the Protected
Mode context.
4.1 HIGHER LEVELS OF ABSTRACTION

C, by its very nature as a high-level language (HLL), is more abstract than assembler. This has distinct advantages when developing modular programs because the
resulting code is more compact and easier to follow, assuming that the programmer
has the language background. It does not necessarily facilitate optimum access to
system hardware because the programmer must rely on the C compiler developer to
provide these underlying service routines. In many cases, of course, these services
are very optimized, but they must have some general-purpose features that could be
167

168

OS/2 and C

Chap. 4

avoided if tailored assembler code were provided. This book assumes that the reader
has a basic familiarity with the C language, as it did for assembler, and Appendix
B reviews the C syntax in the Kernighan and Ritchie mold [S].
What do we mean by more abstract? Multiplication is an example. To square
the variable x in C, one merely writes
x

= x

* x;

To square the same variable in assembler (assuming that xis of word length), one
has
mov
mov
mul
mov

ax, x
dx, 0
x
x, ax

; load accumulator
; clear upper multiplicand
; multiply
; reload x variable

which is a bit more cumbersome. An even more exaggerated example is the line of
C code
y

=

(float)(sin(2.*PI*f*t));

The conversion from double precision to floating point, alone, is a major system
call, as is the reference to the sine mathematical function. These calls would encompass many lines of assembler code to accomplish the same algorithm.
Hence abstraction can be a desirable feature as the programmer moves away
from low-level system services and the hardware. Assuming that a programmer's
span of attention is limited to some rough measure of lines of code, the HLL allows
a more efficient usage of this feature.
4.1.1 The C Include Files
The Toolkit has a number of include files used to set up the API calls and associated variables, types, and structures used by these calls. The Toolkit is highly recommended for users who quickly wish to begin programming OS/2 Protected Mode
C, with its function-like interface. The major Toolkit include file is
OS2.h

which calls
#include <OS2def .h>
#include <bse.h>

and requires a beginning program statement
#define

INCL_BASE

Hence the first line of code prior to any API call would be

Sec. 4.1

169

Higher Levels of Abstraction

#define INCL_BASE
#include <OS2. h>

Note that OS2.h also has provisions to call pm.h, which loads the PM include
routines.
The file bse.h checks to see if INCL_BASE is set and then sets three symbols;
INCL_DOS
INCL_SUB
INCL_DOSERRORS

and (loads)
#include <bsedos. h>
#include <bsesub. h>
#include <bseerr.h>

/*Dos calls*/
/*Vio,Kbd,Mon calls*/
/*Error calls*/

where the first of these sets up the Dos prefix API calls. The second loads the Vio,
Kbd, and Mon prefix API calls and bseerr.h loads the error calls.
It is worthwhile pointing out a typical difference between the Version 1.0
Toolkit and the Version 1.1. Consider the structure definition for getting the physical buffer:
Version 1.0
struct PhysBufData {
unsigned long
buf_start1
unsigned long
buf_length1
unsigned
selectors(2]1
}1

/*start byte* I
/*buffer length*/
/*selector*/

Version 1.1
typedef struct
PBYTE pBuf1
ULONG cb1
SEL asel(1]1
}VIOPHYSBUFJ

_VIOPHYSBUF{
/*pointer to start byte* I
/*buffer length*/
/•selector•/

Clearly, to access these two structures, which serve the same purpose, requires
radically different calling schemes. The programmer can expect to encounter this
type of problem when converting Version 1.0 Protected Mode code to Version 1.1;
however, it is generally desirable to use the Toolkit routines because of the abstraction features intrinsic to these calls.

4.1.2 The Low-Level Nature of the API
We know that standard C code can be used for output to the display with calls of
the type:

170

OS/2and C

Chap. 4

printf ("This is a display message. \n");

This can be accomplished with the standard I/O include file stdio.h and works in
Protected Mode as well as Real Mode. To use the API call in equivalent fashion, we
would need the more structured statements
unsigned vio_hdl = O;
/*video handle*/
char *msg_p = "This is a display message./n";
unsigned lmsg_p = 0;
lmsg_p = strlen(msg_p);
VioWrtTTy( (char far* )msg_p,lmsg_p,vio_hdl);

Thus the reader can see that the API calls tend to be more cumbersome than standard C code and more low level in nature. Clearly, as the example above highlights, the programmer would want to use the standard I/O routines in this case. Frequently, however, services will be required in Protected Mode that cannot be accomplished using the standard C functions. It is these activities that must access the API
directly in low-level fashion. A very good example of this is the screen graphics
modes, which require locking the screen and accessing the physical buffer all in
conjunction with the mode set. These activities fit well with the notion of low-level
calls in C. They correspond to low-level services: accessing the system resources
directly.
Generally, many of the API services are of this low-level nature. The reader is
cautioned to use the standard C syntax where possible but recognize that the API
services are designed to work in a multitasking environment and that some low-level
interfacing will therefore always be necessary.
4.1.3 Comparison of C with Assembler
We have already seen several examples of the differences between C syntax and
assembly language syntax when used to accomplish the same task. Typically, the
assembler is much more detailed and incremental (each instruction accomplishes a
much smaller piece of the overall task). As a further simplified example, consider
addition in C:
y = xl

+ x2;

To accomplish this same syntax in assembler the following code is required:
mov ax, x2
add ax, xl
mov y, ax

Again, this assumes word integer arithmetic. If floating-point operations, for example, are to be implemented,' the overhead increases dramatically.

Sec. 4.2

Introductory C Programming with OS/2

171

Why, then, have we spent time learning the assembler interface in OS/2? A
major reason is to understand the low-level nature of the API interface. In order to
program the API from any language, the programmer must have a feeling for the
syntax at a very basic level. Frequently, access is byte oriented and in order to get
C code to function properly, the programmer must have this very basic understanding. The structures and parameter definitions for C calls to the API rely on a lowlevel interpretation, as found in the assembler calls. When problems arise in the C
debugging process, assembler-level understanding of the API services provides
invaluable insight into the C function calls.
4.2 INTRODUCTORY C PROGRAMMING WITH OS/2

Many application programs require a reasonable level of mathematical sophistication
to achieve their intended computational goals. Generally speaking, assembly language is not the desired vehicle to achieve such sophistication. Modern languages
have evolved such that a great deal can be accomplished within a single language
to span the requirement of sophistication yet retain the ability to implement lowlevel services. The C language is such an implementation, and from this point on we
shall concentrate on programming for OS/2 in the C context. Of course, we will
make an occasional sojourn back to assembly language when the need arises.
4.2.1 C Program Architecture and Structure

Perhaps the easiest way to present the structure of a C program is with a simple
example. Figure 4.1 contains a C program that prints the message
Input word

integer

less

than

32, 768

reads the input word integer value, and calls a function times_2(). The function
times_2() has a single formal parameter that it doubles and converts from integer
to floating point. Then the function prints the floating-point value of twice the initial integer to the display with the message
2

times the

integer value =

with the equal sign followed by the value.
What is typical about this code? First, a comment line has been offset with the
following form:
/*

• • • *I

Next, the C files needed by the program have been specified. In this program there
is only one, stdio.h, and it is included with the statement
#include <stdio. h>

OS/2and C

172

Chap. 4

/* A simple c proqram to illustrate Protected Hoda I/O -- ioprgm.c */

finclude <atdio.h>
main()
{

int x;

/* input variable */

printf("Input word inteqer less than 32,768 \n");
scanf("td•,&x);
times 2(x);
}

-

timas_2(y)
int y;

I* function */

/* formal parameter */

{

float z;

/* floatinq point */

z - (float)(2.•y);

/* double */

printf("2 times the inteqer value• tf\n",z};
}

Figure 4.1 The program ioprgm.c, illustrating typical program formatting for
C code.

Following this preprocessor area, the main function (called main()) appears and the
code contained in this function is subtended within the curly brackets: {... }.The first
line of code is a type declaration for x to be of type integer: int. Next the C standard routine, printfQ, is called, asking for the word integer input. The string contained in quotations is written to the display and terminated by the escape character, \n, which generates a carriage return and line feed. The scanfO routine is called
to read an integer value (%d) into the location (using the address operator,&) specified by x. Finally, the function times_2() is called with x passed as a parameter and
mainO is then ended.
In the function times_20 the formal parameter, y, is declared to be of type
integer and this is declared outside the body of the function. Within the body of the
function all variables are locally defined. Here, for example, xis local to times_20
and is of type fl.oat (floating point). The value of y is doubled and converted to
floating point with the cast: (float). This is used to define z. Next the value of z is
output following the message. Note that the parameter specification (%t) corresponds
to a floating-point output, while earlier we had (%d) to correspond to an integer
format.
Figure 4.2 illustrates the MAKE utility file used to compile and link the C
code. In general the reader is referred to his or her compiler manual to understand
the nature of this, but briefly the command
cl -c -Zi -Os -FPc /Fcioprgm.cod ioprgm.c

compiles the program (-c indicates do not link yet) and sets it up for the CodeView
debugger (-Zi). The -Os parameter tends to reduce code size during optimization and

Sec. 4.2

Introductory C Programming with OS/2

173

ioprqm.obj: ioprgm.c
cl -c -zi -Os -FPc /Fcioprqm.cod ioprgm.c
ioprqm.exe: ioprqm.obj
link /CO ioprqm.obj,ioprqm,ioprgm,slibce.lib/NOE os2.lib/NOE,,

Figure 4.2 MAKE file for ioprgm.c.

-FPc generates floating-point calls and selects the emulator math package. The statement
/Fcioprgm.cod

generates a mixed assembler and C code output file, and ioprgm.c indicates the C
source file.
The next set of lines in the MAKE file corresponds to the link operation. The
/CO sets up CodeView. The first field contains the object modules(s); the second
field contains ioprgm, where the default extension is .exe the run filename; and the
third field contains ioprgm, the map filename with default .map. Next, the libraries
are indicated, with the /NOE option that prevents multiple definitions of the same
name.
Figure 4.3 contains the list file for the mixed assembler and C source code
(the .COD file). It is important to examine this file because it establishes the complexity of the C code in relation to the required assembly language instructions
needed to represent each line of this C code. Note the large number of external
routines called to implement the program appearing in Figure 4.1: _acrtused,
_printf, _scanf, _chkstk, _fldw, _fmnld, _fstsp, _flds, _fstdp, and _fltused.
The text segment is _TEXT and the data segment _DAT. The data segment contains
the strings of text and the integer formal specifier, %d. Aside from the initial setup
for the routine _main, the print output asking for the integer less than 32,768 is
accomplished with the assembly code following the designation for line 9. Next the
integer is read in and a call made to times_2Q. Finally, the main procedure ends.
The times_2() code follows as a NEAR procedure with a number of calls to floating-point routines that emulate the coprocessor. These routines all begin with "f ".
The code in Figure 4.3 is instructive in that it illustrates the general techniques
for generating assembly language instructions from C syntax. Note that no obvious
Protected Mode calls were evident. These are all buried in the routines _printf and
_scanf. The basic C compiler template, however, is evident using _TEXT, _DATA,
and DGROUP.
4.2.2 Accessing the API from C
The API is accessed in much the same fashion from C as it is from assembly language. Using the Toolkit definitions it is possible to set up the C function calls in
a comfortable style for usage. Consider, for example, the prototyping for DosExit:

174

OS/2and C

Chap. 4

Static Name Aliases
TITLE
NAME

ioprgm.c
ioprgm

.8087
_TEXT
SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'CODE'
_TEXT
ENDS
_DATA
SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'DATA'
_DATA
ENDS
CONST
SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'CONST'
CONST
ENDS
_BSS
SEGMENT WORD PUBLIC 'BSS'
_BSS
ENDS
$$SYMBOLS
SEGMENT BYTE PUBLIC 'DEBSYM'
$$SYMBOLS
ENDS
$$TYPES SEGMENT BYTE PUBLIC 'DEBTYP'
$$TYPES ENDS
DGROUP GROUP
CONST, _BSS, _DATA
ASSUME CS: _TEXT, DS: DGROUP, SS: DGROUP
EXT RN
acrtused:ABS
EXT RN
_printf:NEAR
EXTRN
scanf:NEAR
__ chkstk: NEAR
EXT RN
_fldw:NEAR
EXT RN
EXTRN
fmuld:NEAR
EXTRN
_fstsp:NEAR
_flds:NEAR
EXTRN
__ fstdp:NEAR
EXTRN
_fltused:NEAR
EXTRN
_DATA
SEGMENT
$SG159 DB
'Input word integer less than 32,768 ',
OaH, OOH
$SG160 DB
'%d', OOH
$SG165 DB
'2 times the integer value = %£',
OaH,
OOH
_DATA
ENDS
_TEXT
SEGMENT
ASSUME CS: TEXT
; :*** I* A simple C program to illustrate Protected Mode I/0 -- ioprgm.c */

; :*** #include <stdio.h>
; :***
; :*** main()
; :*** {
;; :***
Line 6

_main

PUBLIC
main
PROC NEAR
*** 000000
*** 000001
*** 000003
*** 000006
x

= -2

55
Sb ec
b8 02 00
e8 00 00

push
rnov
mov
call

bp
bp, sp
ax,2
- chkstk

I* input variable *I
; :*** int x;
j: *** printf("Input word integer less than 32,768 \n");
;; :Line
*** 9

*** 000009
*** OOOOOc
*** OOOOOd
*** 000010

b8 00 00
50
e8 00 00
83 c4 02

scanf( "%d" ,&x);
; l***
Line 10
8d 46 fe
*** 000013
;x
000016
50
***
bB 26 00
*** 000017
;

Figure 4.3

mov
push
call
add

ax,OFFSET DGROUP:$SG159
ax
_printf
sp,2

lea

ax, WORD PTR [bp-2]

push
mov

ax
ax,OFFSET DGROUP:$SG160

The >COD file for ioprgm.c.

Sec. 4.2

;; :***
t***

*** OOOOla
*** OOOOlb
*** OOOOle

***

}

; Line 13
*** 00002a
*** 00002c
*** 00002d

_main

50
e8 00 00
83 c4 04

push
call
add

ff 76 fe
e8 00 00
83 c4 02

push
call
add

WORD PTR [bp-2] ;x
_times_2
sp,2

8b e5
5d
c3

mov
pop
ret

sp,bp
bp

ax
scanf
sp, 4

I* function */

times_2(x);

; Line 12
*** 000021
*** 000024
*** 000027

;l

175

Introductory C Programming with OS/2

ENDP

*** times_2(y)
; \***
; 1

***

;l
int y;
Line 16
_TEXT
ENDS
CONST
SEGMENT
$T20002 DQ
04000000000000000r
CONST
ENDS
TEXT
SEGMENT
ASSUME CS: _TEXT
PUBLIC _times_2
_times_2
PROC NEAR
*** 00002e
55
*** 00002£
8b ec
*** 000031
b8 04 00
*** 000034
e8 00 00
*** 000037
56

i:
*** {
; Line 17
y

I* formal parameter *I
2.000000000000000

push
mov
mov
call
push

=4
=

z
-4
float z;

I* floating point */

; :***
; :*** z = (float)(2.*y);
; Line 20

i: ***

bp
bp,sp
ax,4
_chkstk
si

I* double */

*** 000038

8d 5e 04

lea

bx, WORD PTR [bp+4]

*** 00003b
*** 00003e
*** 000042
*** 000045

e8 00 00
8d le 00 00
e8 00 00
Bd 5e fc

call
lea
call
lea

fldw
k,WORD PTR $T20002
:fmuld
k,WORD PTR (bp-4]

*** 000048

e8 00 00

call

_fstsp

;y

;z

i:
***
; l***

print£ ( "2 times the integer value
; Line 22
8d 5e fc
*** 00004b
;z
e8 00 00
*** 00004e
83 ec 08
*** 000051
8b de
*** 000054
e8 00 00
*** 000056
b8
29 00
000059
***
50
*** 00005c
e8 00 00
*** 00005d
83 c4 Oa
*** 000060
} ; Line 23
5e
*** 000063
8b e5
*** 000064
5d
*** 000066

; :***

Figure 4.3

%f\n", z);
lea

bx, WORD PTR (bp-4]

call
sub
mov
call
mov
push
call
add

_fstdp
ax,OFFSET DGROUP:$SG165
ax
_printf
sp, 10

pop
mov
pop

si
sp,bp
bp

(Continued)

flds

5:P, s

bx,sp

176

OS/2and C

*** 00006'1
_times_2
_TEXT

c3

Chap. 4

ret

ENDP
ENDS

END

Figure 4.3 (Concluded)
VOID APIENTRY DosExi t (US HORT, US HORT)

Here the Toolkit definitions are
#define
#define
Typedef

VOID void
APIENTRY pascal far
unsigned int USHORT;

The definitions have their usual meaning in C, and the only one needing an explanation is the type pascal. Pascal refers to the calling convention used in accessing
the function DosExit. When a C function is called the formal parameters are loaded
on the stack, starting with the last parameter first. In the pascal convention the last
parameter is loaded last. In the assembler instruction set, the PUSH instruction puts
its operand on the stack and decrements the stack pointer. Hence, the initiating
assembly language code sequence (at the beginning of each function)
push bp
mov bp,sp
sub sp,N

causes the previous module's (or calling module's) base pointer, bp, to be saved on
the stack and the current stack pointer value, sp, placed in bp. Prior to execution of
this code, the calling program caused the called function (procedure) parameters to
be placed on the stack along with a return address (invoked at the CALL) for the C
convention. The called program places the parameters on the stack along with a
return address for the pascal convention. The "sub sp,N" instruction above simply
reserves N bytes of stack for local usage (N should be even).
The API definitions include a large class of type definitions, such as PCHAR,
for a pointer to a character where
typedef

CHAR FAR

*PCHAR;

Similarly,
typedef

ULONG FAR *PULONG

defines a pointer to a LONG variable.

Sec. 4.2

Introductory C Programming with OS/2

177

A particularly important definition, is one that allows the programmer to establish a FAR pointer:
#define

MAKEP(sel,off)

( (PVOID)MAKEULONG(off,sel))

where
typedef

VOID

FAR

*PVOID;

#define

MAKEULONG(l,h)

and
( (ULONG) ( ( (USHORT) (1))

((ULONG)((USHORT))(h)))<<l6))

Access of the video context, for example, is via the following sequence:
VioSetMode
VioScrLock

( ( (struct_VIOMODEINFO far* )&CGAm) ,vio_hdl);
(wait2, (char far *)dstatl,vio_hdl);

VioScrUnLock(vio_hdl);

Here the structure_VIOMODEINFO is defined as CGAm and must satisfy the API
constraints for structure members. It is defined in the Toolkit context as
typedef

struct

USHORT

cb;

UC HAR
UCHAR

fbType;
color;

USHORT

col;

USHORT

row;

USHORT

hres;

_ VIOMODEINFO

{

US HORT vres;
UCHAR fmt_ID;
UCHAR
}

attrib;

VIOMODEINFO;

Note that the structure above has the same form as the structure used in the assembly language programs except for the two added parameters, which are reserved and
of no significance to the current programs. The video handle is short and declared
with
SHANDLE

vio_hdl

O;

unsigned

short

where
typedef

SHANDLE;

178

OS/2 and C

Chap. 4

The remaining parameters are defined as would be expected in the usual C convention.
This, then, is how the API access is achieved based on the Toolkit definitions.
The programmer can, of course, choose to develop his or her own definitions;
however, it can be expected that they would be similar to those found in the
Toolkit. Note that the function prototyping follows the assembler conventions established in the API library by IBM. The parameter setup in these calls is similar to
that established for the basic assembler routines except that a pascal convention has
been used.
4.2.3 Graphics Using C and OS/2

Figure 4.4 illustrates the MAKE file for a program swave.c, which plots a dynamically varying sine wave. Figure 4.Sa is the flowchart for swave.c and Figure 4.Sb
the actual program code for this module. This code opens with the needed include
file accesses and then sets up the keyboard buffer, an associated structure, several
integer and character parameters, and the floating point arrays x[] and y[]. Next the
principal calling routine, the function mainO, is established.

swave.obj:
cl -c -Zi -Os -FPc swave.c

gphrout.obj: gphrout.c
cl -c -zi -Os -FPc gphrout.c
swave.exe: swave.obj gphrout.obj
link /CO swave.obj+gphrout.obj,swave,,slibce.lib/NOE os2.lib/NOE

Figure 4.4 MAKE file for swave.c.

In the beginning of main(), a number of structures are defined: the physical
buffer (PVBPrt2) and two video mode structures (CGAm and STDm). These all
follow the convention of the Toolkit and the OS/2 parameter definitions for the API
calls [6]. The sine wave is to be iteratively displayed: Each iteration is incremented
a finite time interval to simulate motion. The total number of iterations read is
followed by the setup for the video CGA mode. The first VioSetMode parameter
could have been specified as
(PVIOMODEINFO)&CGAm

instead of using the structure-oriented syntax. The screen is locked and the physical
buffer accessed, using VioGetPhysBuf(). Note that this access allows the program to
return a selector to the buffer, PVBPrt2.asel[O]. The call to sine_wave() includes
specification of the number of iterations and the selector to the physical buffer. Once
the return from sine_wave() takes place, the screen is unlocked and a keyboard
hesitate implemented. This is followed by a reset of the mode to 80 x 25 (STDm)
and the program exit.

Sec. 4.2

Introductory C Programming with OS/2

179

SETUP
DATA

INPUT#
ITERATIONS

SETCGA
MODE

CLEAR
SCREEN

LOCK
BUFFER

GET PHYSICAL
BUFFER SELECTOR

PLOT
SINE WAVE

UNLOCK
SCREEN BUFFER

KEYBOARD
HESITATE

SET STD
MODE

EXIT

Figure 4.Sa Flowchart for swave.c.

The sine_waveO program generates an array of 199 points of the sine wave of
frequency 1 Hz and time interval of 0.02 second. This figure is plotted on the display and then removed [with upltptQ]. After each plot followed by removal, the time
value is incremented by one-tenth of a second. The routine cclsCGAO clears the
CGA screen. Note that it functions similarly to the earlier mainO calls to lock,
unlock, and get the screen buffer. This routine calls clrCGAQ, which actually writes

180

OS/2 and C

Chap. 4

/*.This routine sets & clears CGA mode with screen clear--swave.c
• The generalized nomenclature is used.
* A dynamic sine wave has been added to the CGA mode output.
• This eine wave gradually moves across the screen
* The routine calls gphrout.c graphics functions. */
#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
#include <math.h>

/* Conditional load •/

struct STRINGINBUF lkbd_buf;
CHAR kbd_buf[80];

I* keyboard buf len */
I* keyboard buffer •/
I* end thread */
I* result code •/
I* reserved word */
I* lock status •/
I* lock status */
I* screen coords */

UINT action = o;
UINT error code • O;

UINT wait ;;; 1;

CHAR dstat[l];
CHAR dstatl[l];
float x[250],y[250J;
main()
{

SHANDLE vio hdl • O;
SHANDLE kbd-hdl
O;
UINT wait2 ;;; 1;

UINT xh = 75,xe = 150,yb • 25,ye • 175;

SEL MMl;

int no_iter;
struct VIOPllYSBUF PVBPrt2;
struct -VIOMODEINFO CGAm;
struct :vIOMODEINFO STDm;
PVBPrt2.pBuf - (BYTE far*) (OxB8000);
PVBPrt2.cb • OX4000;
CGAm.cb = 12;
CGAm.fbType • 7;

CGAm.color = 2;
CGAm.col • 40;
CGAm.row = 25;
CGAm..hres = 320;
CGAm.vres • 200;

STDm.cb = 12;
STDm,fbType = 1;
STDm.color = 4;
STDm.col = 80;
STDm.row • 25;
STDm.hres • 720;
STDm..vres = 400;

lkbd_buf.cb = 80;
printf("Input number of iterations\n");
scanf("td",&no_iter);

I* video handle */
I* keyboard handle *I
I* reserved */
I* box points */
I* selector */
I* number iteration *I
I* physical buffer */
I* CGA structure •/
I* 80 x 25 struct */
I* buffer start */
I* buffer size */
I* struct length */
I* CGA mode */
/* CGA color */
I* text columns */
I* text rows */
I* CGA hor res */
I* CGA vert res */
I* struct length */
/* 80 x 25 mode */
I* STD color */
I* text columns */
I* text rows */
I* STD hor res */
I* STD vert res */
I* buffer size */
/* no. updates */

/* set CGA mode */
ViOSetMode(((struct _VIOMODEINFO far *)&CGAm),vio_hdl);
cclsCGA(vio_hdl);

/* clear CGA screen */

VioScrLock(wait2,(char far *)dstatl,vio_hdl);

/* lock screen */
/* .Physical buffer */

Figure 4.Sb The program swave.c, which plots a dynamic sine wave.

Sec. 4.2

Introductory C Programming with OS/2

181

VioGetPhysBuf((struct _VIOPHYSBUF far *)&PVBPrt2,vio_hdl);
MMl • PVBPrt2.asel[OJ;

/* selector */

sine_wave(no_iter,MMl);

I* sine wave •/

/* unlock screen */
/* hesitate screen */
KbdStringin((char far *)kbd buf,
((struct _STRINGINBUF far *)&lkbd_buf),
wait,kbd_hdl);
/* set STD mode */
VioSetMode(((struct _VIOMODEINFO far *)&STDm),vio_hdl);
VioscrUnLock(vio_hdl);

DosExit(action,error_code);
)

sine_wave(NN,MMl)
int NN;
SEL MMl;
{

float scale=35.,mid=lOO.;

/* plot parameters •/

int mmid=lOO,zero=O,end=200,npts=l99,nl,n;

double PI= 3.141592654,t;
t

= o.o;

for(nl=l;nl <= NN;nl++)
{

for(n=l;n <• npts;n++)

I* start time */
I* loop screens */
/* loop array pts *I

{

y[n]=scale*(float) (sin(2.*PI*t));
y[n)=mid-y[n);
x[n]=(int) (n);
t = t +.02;

I* sine wave */
/* adjust plot •/

I* col coordinate *I
I* increment time */

)

for(n=l;n <= (npts-1) ;n++)
pltpt(x[n],x[n+l],y[n),y[n+l],MMl);
for(n=l;n <= (npts-l);n++)
upltpt(x[n],x[n+l],y[n],y[n+l],MMl);
t=t+O.l;
l

I* plot points */
I* unplot points */
I* major shift */

cclsCGA(vio hdll)
SHANDLE vie hdll;
{

-

SEL MM;
UINT waitl = 1;
struct _VIOPHYSBUF PVBPrtl;

/* physical buffer */

PVBPrtl.pBuf =(BYTE far *)(OxBSOOO);
PVBPrtl.cb = Ox4000;

/* phys buf start */
/* buffer length */

VioScrLock(waitl,(char far *)dstat,vio_hdll);

/*lock screen*/
/* physical buffer */
VioGetPhysBuf((struct _VIOPHYSBUF far *)&PVBPrtl,vio_hdll);
MM= PVBPrtl.asel[O);

/*selector*/

clrCGA(MM);

/* CGA clear*/

Figure 4.Sb (Continued)

182

OS/2 and C

VioScrUnLock(vio_hdll);
l

Chap. 4

/* unlock screen */

clrCGA(MM)
SEL MM;
(

INT n;

INT Nl = OxlF3F;
INT DM = Ox2000;
PCHAR ptr;

/* end odd buffer */
/* even offset */
/* pointer scr buf */

for(n = O;n <= N1;n++)
{

ptr = MAKEP(MM,n);
*ptr = O;

/* odd far pointer */
/* clear odd buffer */

l

for(n = O;n <= N1;n++)
{

ptr = MAKEP(MM,DM+n);
*ptr = O;

/* even far pointer */
/* clear even buffer */

l

Figure 4.Sb (Co11cluded)

a zero to each byte in the CGA buffer area. The function MAKEPO is used to
generate the pointer to the physical buffer values, with the selector value passed
from the earlier VioGetPhysBufO call and the offset generated internally.
Figure 4.6 illustrates the graphics routines used in the calls to generate the sine
wave graphics: wdotQ, uwdotQ, pltpt(), and upltpt(). In addition, a box drawing
routine bboxx() and the vertical and horizontal line drawing routines are included.
4.2.4 Low-Level Access for Printer Graphics

Figure 4. 7 illustrates the MAKE file for a program, prtwave.c, which plots a sine
wave on the graphics printer (in this case an Epson FX-85 dot matrix printer). The
MAKE file specifies three C source code files: prtwave.c, the actual sine wave
generator; pprtscr.c, a C source code file that contains the code to drive the printer;
and gphrout.c, the graphics routines specified in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.8a illustrates the flowchart for prtwave.c and Figure 4.8b the corresponding source code for prtwave.c. This code is very similar to the program
swave.c except that the printer routine arrays have been declared in the preprocessor area and a new sine wave routine, ssine_wave(), is called. This routine plots a
single sine wave of 199 points at a selected frequency read in from main(). A call
to prtscrO causes the screen to print on the printer.
Figure 4.9a illustrates the flowchart for the print-screen CGA mode routine,
pprtscr.c. Figure 4.9b contains the code for this routine. Note that this routine performs exactly like its counterpart, prtscr.asm, in assembly language. The only difference is that an intermediate 16,000-byte buffer is not used. The same ESC character outputs are sent to the printer via DosWrite() once the printer is opened as a file
device using DosOpen(). The data from the CGA screen is output as 25 blocks of
640 bytes (eight rows by 80 bytes per row). The routine ldarray is used to load

Sec. 4.2

183

Introductory C Programming with OS/2

/* Graph routines Protected Mode--gphrout.c */
#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
bboxx(xb,xe,yb,ye,MMl)
UINT xb,xe,yb,ye;

BEL MMl;
{

lineh(yb,xb,xe,MMl);
lineh(ye,xb,xe,MMl);
linev(xb,yb,ye,MMl);
linev(xe,yb,ye,MMl);

/* top line */
/* bottom line */
/* right line */
/* left line */

}

lineh(y ,xl,x2 ,MMl)
UINT y,xl,x2;

BEL MMl;
(

UINT n;

for(n = xl;n <= x2;n++)
wdot(n,y,MMl);

I* hor line */

)

linev(x,yl,y2,MM1)
UINT x,yl,y2;
BEL MMl;
{

UINT n;
for(n • yl;n <• y2;n++)
wdot(x,n,MMl);

/* vertical line */

)

wdot(x,y,MMl)
UINT x,y;
BEL MMl;

/* x=col,y=row */

{

PCHAR ptr;
UINT DM = oxoooo;
CHAR MABKl = OxOl;

/* set dot */

if(y & OXOl)
DM = Ox2000;
ptr = MAKEP(MMl,DM+(SO*(Y >> 1) + (x >> 2)))1
•ptr •(*ptr I (MASKl « (2* (3 - x t 4))));

/* even buffer */
/* dot location */
I* "OR" dot */

)

uwdot(x,y,MMl)
UINT x,y;

SEL MMl;
{

PCHAR ptr;
UINT DM = oxoooo;
CHAR MASKl = oxoo;

/* clear dot */

if(y & OxOl)
DM = Ox2000;
ptr - MAKEP(MMl,DM+(SO*(Y >> 1) + (x >> 2)))1
*ptr = (MASKl << (2*(3 - x 'l 4)));

/* even buffer */
/* dot location */
/* write undot */

)

pltpt(xl,x2,yl,y2,MM1)
float x1,x2,y1,y21

BEL MMl;
{

float m;
int row;

/* slope */

int col;

if(xl = x2)
m = 1000.;

/* zero divide */

Figure 4.6 Graph routines used in the library cgraph.lib and taken from
gphrout.c.

else
m = (y2-yl)/(x2-xl);
if( X2 > Xl)

/* normal slope */

(

for(col = (int) (xl)+l;col <= (int)(x2);col++)
(

row =(int)(yl + m•(col - xl));
wdot(col,row,MMl);

/* line equation */
I* write dot */

}
}

else
{

if{X2 < Xl)
{

for(col ={int) (X2)+1;col <= (int} {Xl) ;col++)
(

row=(int) (y2 + m•(col - x2));
wdot(col,row,MMl);

/*write dot*/

}

}

else
{

col = (int) (xl);
if(yl > y2)

/* verticle line */

{

for(row=(int) (y2)+1;row <= (int)(yl);row++)
wdot(col,row,MMl);
}

else
{

for(row=(int) (yl)+l;row <= (int)(y2);row++)
wdot(col,row,MMl)I

upltpt(xl,x2,yl,y2,MM1)
float x1,x2,y1,y2;
SEL MMl;
{

float m;
int row;
int col;

/* slope */

if(Xl == X2)

I* zero divide */

m = 1000.;

else
m = {y2-yl)/(x2-xl);
if(X2 > Xl)

I* normal slope */

{

for(col = (int)(xl};col <=(int) (x2);col++)
{

row• (int} (yl + m•(col - xl));
uwdot(col,row,MMl);

/* line segment */
/* erase dot */

)
}

else
{

i f (X2 < Xl)
{

for(col = (int)(x2)+1;col <=(int) (xl);col++)
{

row=(int) (y2 + m•(col -x2));
uwdot(col,row,MMl);

/*erase dot*/

)
}

else
{

col= (int)(xl);
if(yl > y2)
{

for(row=(int) (y2)+1;row <= (int) (yl);row++)
uwdot(col,row,MMl);
I* erase dot */
)

else
{

for(row=(int)(yl)+l;row <= (int) (y2) ;row++)
uwdot(col,row,MMl);
/* erase dot */

184

Figure 4.6 (Concluded')

Sec. 4.2

185

Introductory C Programming with OS/2

prtwave.obj: prtwave.c
cl -c -zi -Os -FPc prtwave.c
pprtscr.obj: pprtscr.c
cl -c -zi -os -FPc pprtscr.c
gphrout.obj: gphrout.c
cl -c -Zi -os -FPc gphrout.c
prtwave.exe: prtwave.obj pprtscr.obj gphrout.obj
link /CO prtwave.obj+pprtscr.obj+gphrout.obj,prtwave,,\
slibce.lib/NOE os2.lib/NOE,

Figure 4.7 MAKE file for prtwave.c, which plots a sine wave on the printer.

SETUP
DATA

INPUT
FREQUENCY

SETCGA
MODE

CLEAR
SCREEN

LOCK
BUFFER

GET PHYSICAL
BUFFER SELECTOR

PLOT
SINE WAVE

PRINT
SCREEN

UNLOCK
SCREEN BUFFER

KEYBOARD
HESITATE

SET STD
MODE

Figure 4.Sa Flowchart for a program
prtwave.c, which plots a sine wave on
the printer.

EXIT

186

OS/2 and C

Chap. 4

/* This routine sets & clears CGA mode with screen clear--prtwave.c

*
•
•
•

The generalized nomenclature is used.
A sine wave has been added to the CGA mode output.
The routine calls gphrout.c graphics functions.
It prints the plot. */

#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
#include <math.h>

/* Conditional load */

struct STRINGINBUF lkbd_buf;
CHAR kbd_buf[80J;

/* keyboard buf len */
/* keyboard buffer */

UINT action = O;
UINT wait ;;; l;

/* end thread */
/* result code */
/* reserved word */

CHAR dstat[l];
CHAR dstatl[l];

/* lock status */
/* lock status */

float x[250],y[25DJ;
BYTE coll[320];
BYTE MM[4] = {OX40,0xlO,Ox04,0x01};

/* screen coords */
/* column array */
/* mask */
/* weights */
/* dummy */
/* shift count */
/* ESC K (320-256) */
I* CR,LF */
/* ESC A 8/72 */
I* ESC 2 */
/* device */

UINT error code

BYTE w[S]

O;

= {128,64,32,16,8,4,2,l};

BYTE s[4];
BYTE shiftl[4] = {6,4,2,0};
BYTE in_bufferl(4]
{OxlB,Ox4B,64,l};
BYTE in_buffer2(2) = {OxOD,OxOA};
BYTE in_buffer3(3] = {OxlB,Ox41,8};
BYTE in_buffer4[2) = {OxlB,Ox32};
BYTE dev_name[5]
{ 1 L 1 , 1 P 1 ,'T', 1 1 1 ,0};
main()

/* Prtsc routine */

extern prtscr();
SHANDLE vio hdl
SHANDLE kbd-hdl
UINT wait2 ;;; l;
UINT xb = 75,xe
SEL MMl;

/* video handle */

O;

o;
150,yb

25,ye

175;

/* keyboard handle */
/* reserved */
/* box points */
/* selector */

float freq;

/* frequency */

struct _VIOPHYSBUF PVBPrt2;
struct VIOMODEINFO CGAm;
struct =VIOMODEINFO STDm;

/* physical buffer */
/* CGA structure */
/* 80 x 25 struct */

PVBPrt2.pBuf = (BYTE far*) (OXB8000);
PVBPrt2.cb = Ox4000;

/* buffer start */
/* buffer size */

CGAm.cb = 12;
CGAm.fbType = 7;
CGAm.color = 2;
CGAm.col = 40;
CGAm.row = 25;
CGAm.hres
320;

/* struct length */
/* CGA mode */
I* CGA color */
/* text columns */
/* text rows */
/* CGA hor res */
/* CGA vert res */

CGAm.vres = 200;

STDm.cb = 12;
STDm.fbType = l;
STDm.color = 4;
STDm.col = so;
STOm.row = 25;

STDm.hres

720;

STDm.vres = 400;

/* struct length */
/* 80 x 25 mode */
/* STD color */
/* text columns */
/* text rows */
/* STD hor res */
/* STD vert res */

Figure 4.Sb The program prtwave.c.

Sec. 4.2

187

Introductory C Programming with OS/2

lkbd_buf.cb • BO;

/* buffer size */

printf("Input frequency (Hz)\n");
scanf("'f",&freq);
/* set CGA mode */
VioSetMode(((struct _VIOMODEINFO far *)&CGAm),vio_hdl);
cclsCGA(vio_hdl);

/* clear CGA screen */

VioScrLock(wait2,(char far *)dstatl,vio_hdl);

/*lock screen*/
/* physical buffer */
VioGetPhysBuf((struct _VIOPHYSBUF far *)&PVBPrt2,vio_hdl);
MMl = PVBPrt2.asel[OJ;
ssine_wave(freq,MMl);
prtscr(MMl);
VioScrUnLock(vio_hdl);

I* selector */
I* sine wave */
I* print screen *I
I* unlock screen */
I* hesitate screen */

KbdStringin((char far *)kbd_buf,
((struct _STRINGINBUF far *)&lkbd_buf),
wait,kbd_hdl);
/* set STD mode */
VioSetMode(((struct _VIOMODEINFO far *)&STDm),vio_hdl);
DosExit(action,error_code);
}

ssine_wave(freq,MMl)
float freq;
SEL MMl;
{

float scale=JS.,mid=lOO.;
int mmid=lOO,zero=O,end=200,npts•l99,nl,n;
double PI - 3.141592654,t;
t

o.o;

=

for(n=l;n <= npts;n++)
{

y[n]•scale*(float)(sin(2.*PI*freq•t));
y[n]-mid-y[n];
x[n]=(int)(n);
t = t +.02;
}

for(n•l;n <= (npts-l);n++)
pltpt(x[n],x[n+l],y(n],y(n+lJ,MMl);

/* plot parameters */

I* start time */
I* loop array pts *I
I* sine wave */
I* adjust plot */
I* col coordinate *I
I* increment time *I
I* plot points *I

cclsCGA(vio_hdll)
SHANDLE vio hdll;
{

-

SEL MM2;
UINT waitl = 1;
struct _VIOPHYSBUF PVBPrtl;

/* physical buffer */

PVBPrtl.pBuf = (BYTE far *)(OxBBOOO);
PVBPrtl.cb = OX4000;

/* phys buf start */
/* buffer length */

VioScrLock(waitl,(char far *)dstat,vio_hdll);

/*lock screen*/
/* physical buffer */
VioGetPhysBuf((struct _VIOPHYSBUF far *)&PVBPrtl,vio_hdll);
MM2 - PVBPrtl.asel[O];

Figure 4.8b (Continued)

/*selector•/

188

OS/2and C

clrCGA(MM2);

/* CGA clear */

VioScrUnLock(vio_hdll);

/* unlock screen */

Chap. 4

}

clrCGA (MMJ)
SEL MMJ;
{

INT n;

INT Nl = OxlFJF;
INT OM = Ox2000;
PCHAR ptr;

/* end odd buffer */
/* even offset */
/* pointer scr buf */

for(n = o;n <= Nl;n++)
{

ptr = MAKEP(MMJ,n);
*ptr = O;

/* odd far pointer */
/* clear odd buffer */

}

for(n = O;n <= Nl;n++)
{

/* even far pointer */
/* clear even buffer */

ptr = MAKEP(MMJ,DM+n);
*ptr = O;
}

Figure 4.8b (Concluded)

these eight rows in the following manner: For each of the 80 bytes in a row, the
byte is unfolded into its four pixel values (to make the 320 pixels per CGA row).
The single byte containing the four pixel values is stored in four locations: s[O], s[l],
s[2], and s[3]. These values are in turn masked, shifted, and weighted according to
their row position. A running total is generated across all rows for each pixel position and stored in coll[]. The coll[] values are returned to prtscrO (the pprtscr.c
function that accomplishes the screen print). Each buffer row and column value is
returned using
prt

=

MAKEP

(MMl,

DM

+

(80

*(row>>l)

+

(col>>2)));

Here MMl is the selector value and DM =Ox2000 if the row value is odd. Figure
4.10 illustrates a typical sine wave plotted using this program.
4.3 MEMORY MANAGEMENT AND MULTITASKING WITH C

The API services offer a wide variety of multitasking and memory management
options, as we have seen. There is an important constraint to consider when employing programs that run in a multitasking environment: The code is reentrant if differ-

Sec. 4.3

Memory Management and Multitasking with C
OPEN
PRINTER

SET
SPACING

SET
LINES

SETUP BLOCK AND
BLOCK COUNT

CALL
I darray ()

SET
GRAPHIC MODE

PRINT
COLUMNS

OUTPUT
CR&LF

INCREMENT
BLOCK

Figure 4.9a Flowchart for the
program pprtscr.c, which performs
the print operation in CGA mode.

189

OS/2 and C

190

Chap. 4

/* This is a c print screen routine -- pprtscr.c */
#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
prtscr(MMl)
SEL MMl;

/* selector */

{

I*

--------------------------------Printer
parameters

•
•

--------------------------------- *I

extern BYTE in_bufferl(];
extern BYTE in_buffer2[J;
extern BYTE in buffer3[J;
extern BYTE in:::buffer4[J;

/* ESC K (320-256) r */

I* CR,LF */
/* ESC A 8/72 */
/* ESC 32 -- 1/6 */

/* byte counts */
USHORT bytesin=320,bytesout=O,bytesin1•4,bytesin2=2,bytesin3=3;
extern BYTE dev_name[J;
HFILE dev hand
O;
USHORT deV_act = O;
ULONG dev_size = o;
USHORT dev attr = O;
USHORT dev:::flaq = l;
USHORT dev mode = OxOOCl;
ULONG dev_rsv = o;

I* device name *I
I* handle */
I* action */
I* size */
I* attribute */
I* open file */
I* private,nodeny *I
I* reserved */

extern BYTE coll[];

/* column array */

UINT N;
int blk_cnt,sixforty=640,n;

/* block count */

/* open printer */
DosOpen(dev_name,(PHFILE)&dev_hand,(PUSHORT)&dev_act,dev_size,
dev_attr,dev_flaq,dev_mode,dev_rsv);
/* set spacinq */
DosWrite(dev_hand,in_buffer3,bytesin3,(PUSHORT)&bytesout);
/* set lines •/
Doswrite(dev_hand,in_buffer4,bytesin2,(PUSHORT)&bytesout);
blk cnt=O;
for(n=l;n <= 25;n++)

/* 640 block */

{

N = blk_cnt * sixforty;

/* block bytes */

ldarray(N,MMl);

/*load array*/
/* qraphics mode */
DosWrite(dev hand,in bufferl,bytesinl,(PUSHORT)&bytesout);
/* print columns */
DosWrite(dev_hand,coll,bytesin,(PUSHORT)&bytesout);
I* CR,LF */
DosWrite(dev_hand,in_buffer2,bytesin2,(PUSHORT)&bytesout);

/* inc block count */

blk cnt++;
}

-

DosClose(dev_hand);

/* close printer */

}

ldarray(N,MMl)
UINT N;
SEL MMl;
{

extern BYTE MM[];
extern BYTE w[];
extern BYTE s [ J ;
extern BYTE shiftl[J;

Figure 4.9b The routine pprtscr.c.

/* mask */
/* weiqhts */
/* dummy */

/* shift */

Sec. 4.3

Memory Management and Multitasking with C

191

int n,nl,m,N4,row,col;
extern BYTE coll[);

/* column array */

N4 = N/80;

/* block row */

for(n

= O;n <= 79;n++)

{

for(m = O;m <~ 3;m++)

coll[n*4+m] = O;
for(nl = O;nl <= 7;nl++)

/* initialize •/

{

row = N4 + nl;
for(m = O;m <= J;m++)
{

col

s[m)

= n•4;

/* nearest byte */
/* screen byte •/

= rbuf(row,col,MMl);

)

for(m = O;m <= J;m++)
{

s[m)
s[m]
s[m]

=

(s[m)

&

MM[m));

/* mask */
/* shift rt */
/* weight •/
/* column index */
/* column value */

= (s[m) >> shiftl[m]);
= s[m] • w[nl);
col = n•4 + m;
coll[col] = coll[col) + s[m);
)

)

rbuf(y,x,MMl)
SEL MMl;
int x,y;

/* selector */
I* x=col,y=row *I

{

I* buffer ptr */
I* even/odd */

PCHAR
ptr;
UINT DM = OxOOOO;
if(y & OxOl)

OM = Ox2000;

/* odd row */

ptr = MAKEP(MMl,DM + (SO*(Y >> l)+(x >> 2)));
return(•ptr);
)

I* byte pointer *I
I* return value *I

Figure 4.9b (Concluded)

......._................
.....

....

··....._,_.....··

..,.

.
....._.......··"

Figure 4.10 Representative sine wave
output for the program prtwave.c.

OS/2 and C

192

Chap. 4

ent threads call the same function. Hence in multithreaded applications the API
services, which have code written for the multithreaded environment, are a more
desirable way to write code than are the multithreaded versions of the standard C
library routines. We always base our routines on the API calls.
In general, the variety of memory management services is large. These services include DosAllocSeg(), DosSubAllocSeg(), and DosAllocShrSeg(). In the next
section we consider the creation of a shared segment. This is among the more
complex variants of segment manipulation and constitutes a useful example. Similarly, the creation of a process or thread can be contingent on synchronization. For
example, if both a parent and a child process access a shared segment, some form
of synchronization is needed to ensure that one process does not write over the
results of another before the data is properly used. In general we achieve synchronization using semaphores. This approach, using semaphores for synchronization and
the API services for multitasking, allows easy development of both non-reentrant
and reentrant code in the OS/2 multitasking environment. Memory management is,
of course, a subset of this activity, particularly when sharing segments.
4.3.1 Creating and Accessing Segments

A good example of the use of memory management is the creation and access of
shared segments. Figure 4.lla is a flowchart for the program pipestc.c. This program
is the C version of the assembly language program, pipest.asm, which appears in
Figure 3.22b. The program sets up a shared segment, creates a pipe, uses semaphores for synchronization, and passes a message to the pipe via the pipe's buffer
area. A child process, pipeclc.c, then reads the pipe message and prints the message
to the screen. The process is shown in Figure 4.llb, and the code for the child
process appears in Figure 4.12. The MAKE file for pipestc.c is illustrated in Figure
4.13a, and the MAKE file for pipeclc.c is presented in Figure 4.13b.
The program pipestc.c opens with four string expressions of CHAR type.
These expressions define the pointers msg_pd, prgm_nm, shrname, and aseml.
Within the calling function, main(), a number of local variables have been defined
using the standard OS/2 type casts. In the API service call to DosAllocShrSeg(), for
example, the parameters are of the type
SEL msell;
CHAR FAR *shrname;
USHORT msize = 512;

where USHORT = unsigned short (16-bit word) and SEL denotes a selector: unsigned short SEL. The actual call in DosAllocShrSeg() specifies that the selector,
msell, be specified as a pointer object:
(PSEL)

&msell

Here the address of msell is treated as the pointer, as it should be.
When DosMakePipe() executes a read handle and write handle are returned for

Sec. 4.3

Memory Management and Multitasking with C

193

SETUP
DATA

CREATE
SHARED SEGMENT

MAKE
PIPE

PASS PIPE READ
HANDLE TO SEGMENT

CREATE
SEMAPHORE

BEEP

WRITE
MESSAGE TO PIPE

PASS MESSAGE
LENGTH TO SEGMENT

SET
SEMAPHORE
CHILD
PROCESS
CREAT
PROCESS#2

WAIT CLEAR
SEMAPHORE

KILL
PROCESS

EXIT

Figure 4.lla Flowchart for C program
to emulate pipest.asm, a pipe and
shared segment program.

194

OS/2and C

Chap. 4

/* Program to emulate pipest.asm -- pipestc.c

* This routine sets up a child and accesses a shared
* memory segment. */
#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
#include <string.h>

CHAR
•msg_pO = "This is the OS/2 pipe message\n";
CHAR FAR *prgm nm• "PIPECLC.EXE";
CHAR FAR •shrname = "\\SHAREMEM\ \SDATl. DAT";
CHAR FAR •aseml.
"\\SEM\\SDAT.DAT";
INT
blank[l] = {OX0007);
/* Scroll attribute */
size t lmsg_pO;
/* length result */
main()
{

/*--------------------------------------------------------------------------•/
/*
Locally Defined Variables
*/
/*--------------------------------------------------------------------------*/
maize = 5l.2;

USHORT
SEL

msell:

HF ILE
USHORT
US HORT

read_hdl,write_hdl;
pflag = 256;
bytes_written;

USHORT
HSEM
LONG

no excl • l;

USHORT
USHORT

freq • 5000;
duration = 500;

seiii_hdll;
no_to • -1;

I* Shared buffer */
I* Buffer size */
I* Selector */
I* Pipe parameters *I
I* Pointer to pipe handles *I
I* Pipe size bytes *I
I* Length of write *I
I* Semaphore parameters *I
I* No exclusive */
I* Semaphore handle *I
I* No timeout */
I* Beep */
/* 5,ooo Hertz */
I* 500 millisec */

PU INT

ptr;

US HORT
USHORT

action • 1;
O;
result

I* Child process */
I* Failure buffer */
I* Length buffer */
I* Child asynchronous */
I* NULL command parm */
I* NULL environment parm */
I* Structure-result codes */
I* Pointer */
I* Terminate all threads *I
I* Completion code */

USHORT

error2;

/* Dummy error return */

obj_nm_buf[40];
CHAR
USHORT lobj_nm_buf • 40;
1;
USHORT async
O;
CHAR
argst
O;
CHAR
envst
PIDD;
RESULTCODES

/*--------------------------------------------------------------------------•/
/* Clear screen */

els();

/* Create shared sec;iment */
error2 • DosAlloCShrSeg(msize,shrname,(PSEL)&msell);
/* Check creation error */
if(error2 I• 0)
{

printf("Result code
exit(l);

%d",error2);

)

Figure 4.llb Program code for pipestc.c, illustrated in Figure 4.lla.

Sec. 4.3

Memory Management and Multitasking with C

195

/* create pipe */
DosMakePipe((PHFILE)&read_hdl,(PHFILE)&write_hdl,pflag);
ptr • MAKEP(msell,2);
•ptr = read_hdl;

/* Pointer to 2nd word */
/* Read handle */

/* Create system sem */
Doscreatesem(no_excl,(PHSEM)&sem_hdll,(PCHAR)aseml);
DosBeep(freq,duration);

/* Beep speaker */

lmsg__po = strlen(msg__pO);

/* Length of message */

/* Write to handle */
DosWrite(write_hdl,(PVOID)msg__pO,lmsg__pO,
(PUSHORT)&bytes_written);

ptr = MAKEP(msell,4);

•ptr = bytes_written;

/* Pointer to Jrd word */
/* Length of write */

DosSemSet(sem_hdll);

/* Set semaphore */
/* Initiate child */

error2 = DosExecPgm((PCHAR)obj_nm_buf,
lobj nm buf,async,

(PCHAR)&argst,
(PCHAR) &envst,
(PRESULTCODES)&PIDD,
prgm_nm);
/* Check creation error */
if(error2 != O)
(

printf( 11 Error on opening child");
exit(l);
)

OosSemWait(sem_hdll,no_to);

/* wait on child •/

/* Terminate child */
DosKillProcess(PIDD.codeTerminate,PIDD.codeResult);
DosExit(action,result);

/* Terminate parent */

)

els()
{

USHORT
USHORT
USHORT
USHORT
USHORT
HVIO

tr = o;

/* top row */

viO_hdl;

/* left column */
/* bottom row */
/* right column */
/* no. lines */
/* handle */

le = o;
br = 23;
re = 79;
no line = 25;

/* Clear screen */
VioScrollUp(tr,lc,br,rc,no_line,(PCHAR)blank,vio_hdl);
)

Figure 4.llb (Concluded)

the pipe. The read handle, read_hdl, is written into the second word of the shared
segment. A semaphore is created to synchronize the parent and child process. Essentially, we want the parent to wait on the child process until the child completes its
write to the screen. The parent process (pipestc.c) writes the message to the pipe
buffer using Dos Write(), and a return count of the length of the message written is
placed in the shared segment buffer at offset 4. Next, the semaphore is set and the
child process started. Once the child completes, the semaphore is cleared and the

196

OS/2and C

Chap. 4

/* This is the child process -- pipeclc.c
* It writes the actual screen message using pipes */
#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
CHAR FAR
•aseml = "\\SEM\\SDAT.DAT";
CHAR FAR *shrname = "\\SHAREMEM\\SDATl.DAT";
CHAR
buffer[256];
main()

/*

--------------------------------------------------------------

*

--------------------------------------------------------------*/

*

Local Variables

action = l;
result = O;

HVIO

vio_hdl;

USHORT
USHORT

freq = 4000;
duration = 500;

/* 4,000 Hertz */
/* 500 millisec */

HSEM

sem_hdll;

SEL

shrsel;

I* Semaphore handle *I
I* Shared Segment Sel */

HFILE

read_hdl;

/* Read handle */

USHORT
USHORT

lmsg;

I* Length message */
I* Bytes read */

bytes_read;

USHORT FAR *ptr;

I*

I* Exit parameters */
I* Terminates all threads */
I* Completion code */
I* Video handle */
I* Beep */

USHORT
USHORT

/* 32-bit pointer */

---------------------------------------------------------------*/
/* Open semaphore */
Dosopensem((PHSEM)&sem_hdll,aseml);
DosBeep(freq,duration);

/* Beep speaker */

DosGetShrSeg(shrname,(PSEL)&shrsel);

/* Shared Segment */

ptr = MAKEP(shrsel,2);

/* Pointer to 2nd word */
/* Read handle */
/* Pointer to 3rd word */
/* Length of message */

read_hdl

= •ptr;

ptr = MAKEP(shrsel,4);
lmsg = •ptr;

/* Read message */
DosRead(read_hdl,buffer,lmsg,(PSHORT)&bytes_read);
VioWrtTTy(buffer,lmsg,vio_hdl);

/* Write message */

DosSemClear(sem_hdll);

/* Clear semaphore */

DosExit(action,result);

/* Terminate process */

}

Figure 4.12 Program code for child process, pipeclc.c, used by pipestc.c.

Sec. 4.3

Memory Management and Multitasking with C

197

pipestc.obj: pipestc.c
cl -c -zi -os -FPc pipestc.c
pipestc.exe: pipestc.obj
link /CO pipestc.obj,pipestc,,\
slibce.lib/NOE os2.lib/NOE,,

(a)

pipeclc.obj: pipeclc.c
cl -c -zi -os -FPc pipeclc.c
pipeclc.exe: pipeclc.obj

link /co pipeclc.obj,pipeclc,,\
slibce.lib/NOE os2.lib/NOE,,

(b)
Figure 4.13

(a) MAKE file for pipestc.c and (b) MAKE file for pipeclc.c.

wait state for the parent is terminated. The child process is terminated (along with
any dependent processes), and the parent is completed with the termination
DosExit(). The child process is illustrated in Figure 4.12.

4.3.2 Creating a Thread or Process
In Figure 4.llb the parent process initiates a child process specified using the
pointer prgm_nm. This specification links the two processes and is the last parameter ofDosExecPgm(). Figure 4.12 contains the program for the child. Note that the
semaphore name and the shared segment name are the same as those specified by
the parent. This constitutes the common link between the two processes. The speaker
is beeped to indicate that the child is operating. The shared segment is retrieved and
the pipe read handle and buffer length obtained. DosRead() is used to load buffer[]
with the message in the pipe, and this message is printed using VioWvtTTY().
The return to the parent results in termination of the work semaphore. The
child process is terminated by the parent, as well, with a full exit from the parent
mode. Note that DosKillProcess() is not absolutely necessary because the child,
pipeclc.exe, has been terminated but is good programming practice because it terminates all dependent processes started by the child, in addition to the child process
itself, if needed. Figure 4.llb also illustrates the clear screen routine, which is a onetime call to VioScrollUp().
Figure 4.14 contains the MAKE file for a program ckthread.c, which creates a
thread as opposed to a new process. Remember that a thread shares resources with

0$/2 and C

198

Chap. 4

ckthred.obj: ckthred.c
cl -c -Zi -Gs -FPc -F coo -Lp ckthred.c
ckthred.exe: ckthred.obj
link /CO ckthred.obj,ckthred,ckthred,slibce.lib/NOE os2.lib/NOE,,

Figure 4.14 MAKE file for ckthred.c. This program checks the formation of
child threads.

the subordinate or child threads. This is unlike creation of a new process, where
each subordinate process has its own encapsulated resources.
Since each thread has its own stack (a resource unique to the thread) a highlevel-language compiler such as C will report stack overflow errors because the
thread's unique stack space does not overlap within a given process. This usually
generates an error message (in the Microsoft C Optimizing Compiler Version 5.1,
for example). To avoid such error messages, a compiler option, -Gs, can be used to
eliminate stack checking only when the stack space is known to be sufficient [7].
This will allow the compilation of programs that generate separate threads without
generating an error condition. Each thread should allow a minimum stack size of
2048 bytes. In Figure 4.14 the compile and link allow generation of symbolic
debugging information through options -Zi (compiler) and /CO (linker).
Figure 4.15 illustrates a simple OS/2 C language program which generates a
thread that prints the message
"This is the subordinate thread"

to the display. A second message is printed following completion of the child thread
action and return to the parent calling thread. The latter thread prints the message
"This is the main thread"

Both threads generate 500-millisecond tones. Synchronization is achieved using
semaphores.
In the example program illustrated in Figure 4.15, no error checking exists
following the API calls. This is because the program is fully debugged and the need
for such diagnostics is minimized. During the debugging phase such diagnostics
were included. Should a malfunction occur the user can, of course, set up such
checking procedures. Note that in the call DosCreateThread(), the third parameter
references byte 2047 in the stack as the stack start. This is because of the way the
stack pointer is changed following a push to the stack. Element 2047 is the top of
the stack in terms of address, and each push decrements the stack pointer to a lower
address. Throughout this example the Toolkit nomenclature has been used. The type
casting is in keeping with the Toolkit defined types and the actual API calls reflect
the IBM Toolkit definitions for setup of the API functions.

Sec. 4.3

Memory Management and Multitasking with C

199

/* Thre
#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
#include <strinq.h>
#define SSIZE 2048
void FAR threadl(void):
CHAR *msq_pl = "\n This is the main thread \n":
CHAR *msg_p2

= "This is the subordinate thread \n";

CHAR FAR *aseml = "\\SEM\\SDAT.DAT":
CHAR stackl[SSIZE]:
HVIO vie hdl;
HSEM sem=hdll;

/* Stack for threadl */

size t lmsg_pl;
size=t lmsg_p2;

main()
(

= 3000, duration = 500;

USHORT
USHORT

action = 1, result = o, no_excl

TID

threadID;

LONG

no_to = -1;

freq

l;

/* Thread ID •/
/* no timeout */

DosBeep(freq,duration);

/*Beep Speaker*/

/* Create semaphore */
DoscreateSem(no_excl,(PHSEM)&sem_hdll,(PCHAR)aseml);
DosSemSet(sem_hdll):

/* Set semaphore */

DosCreateThread(threadl,(PTID)&threadID,(PBYTE)&stack1[2047]):
Dossemwait(sem_hdll,no_to):

/* wait thread */

lmsq_pl = strlen(msq_pl):

/* Length Message 1 */

VioWrtTTy(msg_pl,lmsg_pl,vio_hdl);
/* End main thread */

DosExit(action,result);
)

void FAR threadl(void)
{

USHORT

freql = 5000, duration

400;

DosBeep(freql,duration);

/* Beep speaker */

lmsq_p2 = strlen(msg_p2);

/* Length Message

VioWrtTTy(msg_p2,lmsg_p2,vio_hdl);

/* Message 2 */

DosSemClear(sem_hdll):

/* Clear semaphore */

*I

)

Figure 4.15 The program ckthred.c, which creates and exercises a child thread.

200

OS/2and C

Chap. 4

4.4 OTHER PROGRAMS
We have seen several examples of how to employ the API services in the C environment. These were beginning examples. In this section it will be useful to develop
several more examples illustrating the lower-level nature of the API calls in this C
environment. A great deal about the OS/2 implementation can be learned from these
examples since frequently implementation features are obscured by the general
syntax considerations.

4.4.1 A Rotating Tetrahedron
As a starting point, consider two-dimensional space represented by the usual Cartesian axes: x and y. Now consider the rotation of the point (x1 , y 1) to (xi, Yi)· Here,
if r is the radius of the points from the origin

xi

= r cos(a 1)

(4.1)

Y1

= r sin(a 1)

(4.2)

= r cos(ai)
Yi = r sin(a

(4.3)

1)

(4.4)

= a + ai

(4.5)

and

xi
Writing

ai
we have

c:)

=

( r cos(a + a,) )

(4.6)

(" ) c

which becomes

r sin(a + a 1)

c*) - y, sffi(a) )

=

Yi

(4.7)

x 1 sin(a) + y 1 cos(a)

when the trigonometric identities are used for sine and cosine of the addition of two
angles [4]. In matrix form

x2 )

( xi cos(a) - sin(a))

( x1 )

y 2 sin(a) + cos(a)

y1

(
y2

=

This rotation can be extended to three dimensions, where

( 4 .S)

Sec. 4.4

201

Other Programs

a : rotation angle about the x-axis
13 : rotation angle about the y-axis
y : rotation angle about the z-axis
and we obtain the rotation matrices (A, B, and C, respectively) appearing in Table
4.1. Choosing an order to the rotation, we generate an overall three-dimensional
rotation given by the matrix
R= CBA

(4.9)

This matrix is indicated in Table 4.1 and will serve as the basis for rotation of the
tetrahedron. Note that the three rotations in Equation (4.9) are not orthogonal. We
would need to select a different set of rotation angles to ensure orthogonality.
TABLE 4.1

ROTATION MATRICES FOR THREE-DIMENSIONAL MOVEMENT

0
c?s a
sma

R =

CBA

cos 13

0 sin 13 ]

0 ]
-sin a
cosa

B =[

cos 13 cosy

sin a sin 13 cos y - cos a sin y
sin a sin 13 sin y + cos a cos y
sin a cos 13

= [ cos 13 sin y
-sin 13

0

-sin 13

1

0

0 cos 13

C

=

[

cosy -sin y
si~ y cosy
0

~]

cosasinl3cosy+sinasiny]
cos a sin 13 sin y - sin a cos y
cos a cos 13

If we have a point on the tetrahedron given by (x, y, z), it is possible to define a
rotated point based on R using

(4.10)
In this example the tetrahedron appearing in Figure 4.16 will be used and rotated
using R.
Figure 4.17 is the MAKE file for the rotating tetrahedron program. Note that
pprtscr.c is not compiled in this MAKE file and we assume that an object module
is available at link time. Figure 4.18a is the Structure Chart for this program. Figure 4.18b illustrates a flowchart for tetra.c, the main program module. Figure 4.19
contains the code for tetra.c. This module reads the three angular rates of rotation:
a 0 , 130 , and y0 • Also read in is a scale factor for the size of the display image and the
number of iterations to be rotated. Each iteration assumes an effective time increment of dt 0.05 unit.

=

202

OS/2and C
z

(0,0,1)

/

Figure 4.16 Three-dimensional starting representation for the tetrahedron.

tetra.obj: tetra.c
cl -c -zi -Gs -FPc -F coo -Lp tetra.a
rotetra.obj: rotetra.c
cl -c -Zi -Gs -FPc -F coo -Lp rotetra.c
rotmat.obj: rotmat.c
cl -c -zi -Gs -FPc -F coo -Lp rotmat.c
rotpt.obj: rotpt.c
cl -c -Zi -Gs -FPc -F coo -Lp rotpt.c
dmapoirit.obj: dmapoint.c
cl -c -zi -Gs -FPc -F coo -Lp dmapoint.c
udmapoin.obj: udmapoin.c
cl -c -Zi -Gs -FPc -F coo -Lp udmapoin.c
tetra.axe: tetra.obj rotetra.obj rotmat.obj rotpt.obj \
dmapoint.obj udmapoin.obj pprtscr.obj cgraph.lib
link tetra+rotetra+rotmat+rotpt+dmapoint+udmapoin+pprtscr,,,\
slibce.lib/NOE os2.lib/NOE cgraph.lib/NOE,,

Figure 4.17 The MAKE file, tetra.mak, for the rotating tetrahedron.

Chap. 4

Sec. 4.4

203

Other Programs
000
PROGRAM TO
CREATE
ROTATING
TETRAHEDRON

100

I

l

I

200

INITIALIZE
WINDOW

110

l

ROTATION
ANGLES

J
120

300

CALCULATE
ROTATED
TETRAHEDRON

l

SCALING AND
NUMBER OF
ITERATIONS

l

210

I

1
EXIT
WINDOW

]
220

GET
MESSAGE

TRANSLATE
MESSAGE

Figure 4.18a Structure Chart for the rotating tetrahedron program.

The module tetra.c contains the usual structures for VioSetModeQ. After the
display and physical buffer selectors are obtained, a call is made to r_tetra(), which
sets up the new dynamic angle variables and calls rot_tetra(), which appears in
Figure 4.20. Note that the arrays XX[], YY[], and ZZ[] are used to transfer the
vertexes of the tetrahedron to rot_point(), where these points undergo the appropriate rotations. A call rot_mat() sets up the rotation matrix constants. The two functions DMA point() and uDMApoin() generate and remove the connecting lines,
respectively. Figure 4.21 illustrates the calculation of the rotation matrix elements
and should be compared with R in Table 4.1. Figure 4.22 merely completes Equation (4.10).
Figures 4.23 and 4.24 show the routines for accessing the physical screen
buffer (DMApoint.c) and removing an existing dot on the screen (uDMApoin.c).
They call wdot() and uwdot(), respectively, which are obtained from the library,
cgraph.lib (see Figure 4.6).
Figures 4.25a and 4.25b illustrate the rotating tetrahedron after 100 iterations
and 50 iterations, respectively. The input values for rates of rotation are a 0 = {30 =
y0 = 1 and the scale is 60 units. These figures were obtained using prtscr().
4.4.2 Plotting Dow Jones Activity

The major purpose of this example is to illustrate disk access under OS/2. We need
to recognize that some activities that are performed using the API calls can also be
performed using the default C library (run time). Disk access is one of these activities.

OS/2 and C

204

Chap. 4

SETUP
DATA

SETCGA
MODE

CLEAR
SCREEN

LOCK
SCREEN

GET PHYSICAL
BUFFER SELECTOR

CACULATE AND PLOT
ROTATED TETRAHEDRON

PRINT
SCREEN

UNLOCK
SCREEN BUFFER

KEYBOARD
HESITATE

SET STD
MODE

EXIT

Figure 4.18b Flowchart for tetra.c,
the rotating tetrahedron program.

Sec. 4.4

Other Programs

205

* The routine calls gphrout.c graphics functions. */

/* This program gener

#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
#include <stdio.h>

/* conditional load */

struct STRINGINBUF lkbd_buf;
CHAR kbd_buf[BO];

/* keyboard buf len */
/* keyboard buffer */

UINT action = O;
UINT error code = O;
UINT wait ;;: l;

/* end thread */
/* result code */
/* reserved word */

CHAR dstat[l];
CHAR dstatl[l];

/* lock status */
/* lock status */

float XX[5]
{0.,1.,0.,0.,0.)
float YY[5] = {0.,0.,1.,0.,0.)
float ZZ[5J = {0.,0.,0.,0.,1.)

/* Coords tetra */

float x,y,z;
float scale;
float a[lOJ;
float xxl[5],yyl[5];
float XXX1[5],yyyl[5];
float dt = 0.05;
int NTOTAL;
float alpha,beta,gamma,alphaO,betao,gammao;

I*

*
*BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE

Print Screen Parameters

coll[320];
MM(4] = {OX40,0xlO,Ox04,0x01);
w[8] = {128,64,32,16,8,4,2,l};
s[4J;
shiftl[4J = {6,4,2,0};
in bufferl[4]
{OxlB,Ox4B,64,l};
in:buffer2[2] = {OXOD,OxOA};
in_buffer3[3] = {OxlB,Ox41,8};
in buffer4[2] = {OxlB,Ox32};

*I

deV_name[S] = {'L','P','T','l',O};

*I

/*
main()

I* Prtsc routine */

extern prtscr(};
SllANDLE vio hdl
SllANDLE kbd-hdl
UINT wait2 ;;: l;
SEL MMl;

O;
O;

I* video handle */

/* keyboard handle */
I* reserved */
I* dummy selector */

struct VIOPHYSBUF PVBPrt2;
struct =VIOMODEINFO CGAm;
struct _VIOMODEINFO STDm;

/* physical buffer */
/* CGA structure */
I* BO x 25 struct */

PVBPrt2.pBuf = (BYTE far*} (OXB8000};
PVBPrt2.cb = Ox4000;

I* buffer start */
I* buffer size */
I* struct length *I
I* CGA mode */
I* CGA color •/

CGAm.cb = 12;
CGAm.fbType = 7;
CGAm.color = 2;

Figure 4.19
tetrahedron.

Program code for tetra.c, the main calling program for the rotating

206

OS/2 and C

CGAm.col = 40;
CGAm.row = 25;

Chap. 4

/* text columns •/
/* text rows •/
/* CGA her res •/
/* CGA vert res *I

= 320;
CGAm.vres = 200;

CGAm.hres

STDm.cb = 12;
STDm.fbType = l;
STDm.color = 4;
STDm.col = 80;
STDm.row = 25;
STDm.hres = 720;
STDm.vres - 400;

/* struct length •/
/* 80 x 25 mode •/
/* STD color •/
/* text columns •/
/* text rows •/
/* STD her res •/
/* STD vert res *I

lkbd_buf.cb = 80;

/* buffer size •/

printf( 11 Input x-rotation rad/sec \n");
scanf("%f 11 ,&alphaO);
printf("Input y-rotation rad/sec \n");
scanf("%f",&betaO);
printf("Input z-rotation rad/sec \n");
scanf ("%f", &gammaO) ;

printf("Input scale \n");
scanf("%f 11 ,&scale);
printf("Input total no. iterations \n");
scanf("%d 11 ,&NTOTAL);

/* set CGA mode •/
VioSetMode(((struct _VIOMODEINFO far •)&CGAm),vio_hdl);

/* clear CGA screen •/

cclsCGA(vio_hdl);
VioScrLock(wait2,(char far *)dstatl,vio_hdl);

/*lock screen•/
/* physical buffer •/
VioGetPhysBuf((struct _VIOPHYSBUF far •)&PVBPrt2,vio_hdl);
MMl = PVBPrt2.asel[O);

/* selector •/

r_tetra(MMl);

/* tetrahedron */

prtscr(MMl);

/* print screen */

VioScrUnLock(vio_hdl);

/* unlock screen */
/* hesitate screen */

KbdStringin((char far •)kbd_buf,
((struct STRINGINBUF far •)&lkbd_buf),
wait,kbd_hdl);
/* set STD mode •/
VioSetMode(((struct _VIOMODEINFO far *)&STDm),vio_hdl);
DosExit(action,error_code);
}

r tetra (MM2}
SEL MM2;
{

int n;

alpha = o.;
beta=O.,

/* x-angle •/
/* y-angle •/
/* z-angle •/

qamma = o;
for(n

= l;n <= NTOTAL;n++)

(

alpha = alpha + alphaO*dt;

/* dynamic angles •/

beta = beta + betaO•dt;
gamma = gamma + qamm.aO•dt;
rot_tetra(alpha,beta,qamma,n-l,MM2);

Figure 4.19 (Continued)

/* rotation •/

Sec. 4.4

207

Other Programs

cclsCGA(vio_hdll)
SHANDLE vio hdll;

-

{

SEL MM;
UINT waitl = 1;
struct _VIOPHYSBUF PVBPrtl;
PVBPrtl.pBuf = (BYTE far*) (OxB8000);
PVBPrtl.cb = Ox4000;

/* physical buffer */
/* phys buf start */
/* buffer length */

VioscrLock(waitl,(char far *)dstat,vio_hdll);

/*lock screen*/
/* physical buffer */
VioGetPhysBuf((struct _VIOPHYSBUF far *)&PVBPrtl,vio_hdll);
MM= PVBPrtl.asel[O];

/* selector •/

clrCGA(MM);

/* CGA clear */

VioScrUnLock(vio_hdll);

/* unlock screen */

)

clrCGA(MM)
SEL MM;
{

INT n;

INT Nl = OxlFJF;
INT OM = Ox2000;
PCHAR ptr;
for(n

/* end odd buffer */
/* even offset */
/* pointer scr buf •/

= O;n <= Nl;n++)

{

ptr = MAKEP(MM,n);
*ptr = O;

/* odd far pointer •/
/* clear odd buffer */

}

for(n

= o;n <= Nl;n++)

(

ptr = MAKEP(MM,DM+n);
*ptr = O;

/* even far pointer */
/* clear even buffer */

}

Figure 4.19 (Concluded)

Figure 4.26 presents a routine timhist.c that runs in Protected Mode and functions identically to its Real Mode counterpart. The program generates a disk file that
serves as a time-ordered database. The program accepts three values per record: a
month, a year, and a tabulated value. The library functions, called in this code
correspond to the standard C library functions, which are reentrant, hence can be
used for Protected Mode calls. For the example to be illustrated in subsequent figures, this routine was used to create a database of monthly Dow Jones values between January 1988 and December 1988.

208

OS/2 and C

Chap. 4

/* Function to rotate tetrahedron •/
#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
rot_tetra(alphal,betal,gammal,N,MMl)
float alphal,betal,gammal;
int N;
SEL MMl;
{

extern float XX[J,YY[J,ZZ[J;
extern float x,y,z;

extern float scale;
extern float xxl[),yyl[J;
int n;

/* angles •/

I* Tetra points •/
/* point */
/* scaling */
/* tetrahedron */

if(N > 0)
(
/* Clear tetrahedron •/
uDMApoin(xxl[l] ,xxl[2] ,yyl[l) ,yyl[2] ,MMl);
uDMApoin(xxl[l],xxl[3],yyl[l),yyl[3],MMl);
uDMApoin(XXl[l] ,XX1[4) ,yyl[l) ,yyl[4] ,MMl);
uDMApoin(xxl[2),xxl[3],yyl[2],yyl[3],MMl);
uDMApoin(xxl[2] ,xxl[4] ,yyl[2] ,yyl[4] ,MMl);
uDMApoin(xxl[3],xxl[4],yyl[3],yyl[4],MMl);
}

rot_mat(alphal,betal,galtllllal);

/* load rotate */

for(n = l;n <= 4;n++)
(

x•XX[n];
y = YY[n];
z = ZZ[n];
rot_point();
xxl[n]

yyl[n]

= x•scale + 150.;

= y•scale + 100;

/* x-projection */
/* y-projection */

}

/* Rotate tetrahedron */
DMApoint(xxl[l],XX1[2],yyl[l],yyl[2],MMl);
DMApoint(xxl[l],xxl[3],yyl[l],yyl[3],MMl);
DMApoint(xxl[l] ,XX1[4] ,yyl[l] ,yyl[4] ,MMl);
DMApoint(xxl[2],XX1[3],yyl[2],yyl[3],MMl};
DMApoint(xxl[2] ,xxl[4] ,yyl[2] ,yyl[4] ,MMl);
DMApoint(xxl[3] ,xxl[4] ,yyl[3] ,yyl[4] ,MMl);
}

Figure 4.20 The routine rotetra.c, which sets up the tetrahedron and calls the
rotation matrices.

Figure 4.27 contains the MAKE file for dja.c, which reads the database created
and generates a plot of the activity. In this case, this activity corresponds to the Dow
Jones performance. Figure 4.28 presents the actual program code for dja.c. Note the
needed API calls to clear the screen, plot the graphics, and print the screen. Figure
4.29 is the prtscr() output for this Dow Jones time history. The curve consists of
monthly values rounded to the nearest five points.
The use of fprintf() constitutes the standard 1/0 call for the disk write and
works as well in Protected Mode as in Real Mode. IBM and Microsoft have maintained this standard 1/0 interface within the constraints of OS/2.

Sec. 4.4

209

Other Programs

/* Function to calculate rotation matrix •/
#include <math.h>
rot_mat(alpha,beta,gamma)
float alpha,beta,gamma;

/* angles •/

(

extern float a[);
double al,CA,CB,CG,SA,SB,SG;

/* rotation matrix */

al
CA
SA
al
CB
SB
al
CG
SG

/* Sines & cosines */

(double) (alpha);
cos(al);

sin(al);
(double)(beta);
cos(al);
sin(al);
(double) (gamma) ;
cos(al);
sin(al);

(float) (CB•CG);
(float) (SA*SB*CG - CA*SG);
(float) (CA•SB•CG + SA*SG);
(float) (CB•SG);
(float) (SA•SB•SG + CA*CG) ;
(float) (CA•SB•SG - SA*CG);
(float) (-SB);
(float) (SA•CB);
(float) (CA•CB);

a[l]
a[2]
a[J]
a[4]
a[5J
a[6]
a[7]
a[B]
a[9J

/* Matrix elements */

)

Figure 4.21 The program rolmat.c, which calculates the rotation matrix.

/* Function to generate rotated point •/
rot__point ()
(

extern float x,y,z;
extern float a[];
float xl,yl,zl;

/* point •/
/* rotation matrix •/
/* intermediate */

xl
a[l]*x + a[2]*Y + a(JJ•z
yl = a[4J•x + a[5J*Y + a[6J*z
zl = a[7J•x + a[B]*Y + a[9]*z
x

= xl;

y

yl;
zl;

Figure 4.22 The program rotpt.c, which rotates a point.

OS/2and C

210

Chap. 4

/* This routine plots a connecting line using DMA */
#define INCL BASE
finclude <os2.h>

DMApoint (xl,x2,yl,y2,MM1)
float xl,x2,yl,y2;

SEL MMl;
(

float m;
int row;
int col;

if (xl

x2)
m

1000;

/*Upper limit on slope•/

else

m
(y2 - yl)/ (x2 - xl);
if(x2 > xl)

/* normal slope •/

{

for (col =(int) (xl)+l; col <= (int) (X2): col++)
{
/* y-axis behavior •/
row= (int) (yl + m•(col - xl));
wdot(col,row,MMl);

/*write dot*/

}

else
{

if(X2 < Xl)
{

for(col =(int){x2)+l;col <= (int) (xl); col++)
{
/* y-axis behavior */
row = (int) (y2 + m•(col - x2));
wdot(col,row,MMl);
/* write dot •/
}

else
{

col = (int) (xl):
if(yl > y2)

/* Vertical line •/

{

for(row = (int) (y2)+l;row <= (int) (yl) ;row++)
wdot(col,row,MMl):
/* write dot •/
else
(

for(row = (int) (yl)+l;row <= (int) (y2) ;row++)
wdot(col,row,MMl);
/* write dot •/

Figure 4.23

The program DMApoint.c, which writes a point on the display using DMA.

Sec. 4.4

211

Other Programs

/* This routine removes a connecting line using DMA */
#define INC BASE
#include <os2.h>
uDMApoin(xl,x2,yl,y2,MMl)
float xl,x2,yl,y2;
SEL MMl;
{

float m;

int row;
int col;

i f (xl

x2)
m = 1000;

/*Upper limit on slope•/

else

m
(y2 - yl)/{x2 - xl);
if(X2 > Xl)

/* normal slope */

{

for {col ={int) {xl)+l; col<= (int) (x2); col++)
{

row= (int) (yl + m•(col - xl));
uwdot(col,row,MMl);

/* erase dot */

}

else
{

if(x2 < xl)
{

for(col =(int) (X2)+l;col <= (int)(xl); col++)
{

row = (int) (y2 + m• (col - x2));
uwdot(col,row,MMl);
/*erase dot*/
}

else
{

col= (int) (xl);
if(yl > y2)

/* Vertical line •/

{

for(row = (int) (y2)+1;row <= (int) (yl) ;row++)
uwdot(col,row,MMl);
I* erase dot */
else
{

for(row = (int)(yl)+l;row <= (int) (y2);row++)
uwdot(col,row,MMl);

/* erase dot */

Figure 4.24 The program uDMApoin.c, which removes a point from the
display using DMA.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4.25 (a) The tetrahedron after 100 iterations with and scale = 60.
(b) The tetrahedron after 50 iterations with and scale = 60.

212

OS/2 and C

Chap. 4

/* Routine to create time-history/value database -- timhist.c*/
#include <stdio.h>

/* I/O file */

int month[288),year[288);
float value[288);
char FN1[81);

/* time arrays */
/* quant. interest */
/* filename array */

main()
{

int n,counter,check;
FILE •outfile;

/* integer var. */
/* stream pointer */

printf("Input database filename \n");

gets{FNl);
n = l;

month[O) = l;
while(month[n-1] != O)

/* library routine •/
/* initialize index */
/* init month not o *I

{

printf("Input month as int (O terminates)\n");
scanf("%d",&month[n));
if(month[n] != O)
{

printf("Input year as 2-digit int\n");
scanf("%d",&year[n]);

printf("Input value - floating point\n 11 ) ;
scanf("%f",&value[n]);
}

n++;

if(n > 288)
exit(l};
counter = n - 2;

if((outfile

fopen(FNl,"w")} ==NULL)

I* increment index *I
I* overflow mem *I
I* fix count */
I* open out file *I

{

printf("OUtput file failure: %s" ,FNl};
exit(l);
}

fprintf(outfile,"%d ",counter};
for(n = l;n <= counter;n++)

/* output count *I

fprintf (outfile, "%d %d %f ",month[n) ,year[n), value[n]);
if((check = fclose(outfile}} != O}

/* close file */

{

printf("Error in output file close");

exit{l);
}

Figure 4.26 The routine timhist.c, whieh creates a data file consisting of dates
and values.

dja.obj: dja. c
cl -c -Zi -Gs -FPc -F coo -Lp dja.c
dja.exe: dja.obj pprtscr.obj cgraph.lib
link dja+pprtscr,,,\

slibce.lib/NOE os2.lib/NOE cgraph.lib/NOE,,

Figure 4.27 The MAKE file for dja.c, which plots the Dow Jones activity
generated by timhist.c.

Sec. 4.4

Other Programs

213

/* Routine to read Do

#define INCL BASE
#include <stdio.h>
#include <os2.h>
#include <math.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
int month[288],year[288];
float value[288];
char FN1[81];
float xx[1024J;
char buffer[90],bufferl[90];

I* time arrays */
I* quantity */
I* filename array */
I* Scratch buffers */

struct STRINGINBUF lkbd_buf;
CHAR kbd_buf[SO];

I* keyboard buf len */
I* keyboard buffer */

UINT action z O;
UINT error code = O;

UINT wait ;; l;

I* end thread */
I* result code */
I* reserved word */

CHAR dstat[l];
CHAR dstatl[l];

I* lock status */
I* lock status */

I*

•

Print Screen Parameters

•

*I

BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE

coll[320];
MM[4] = {Ox40,0x10,0x04,0X01};
w[8] = (128,64,32,16,8,4,2,l};
s[4];
shift1[4] = (6,4,2,0};
in bufferl[4]
(Ox1B,Ox4B,64,l};
in=buffer2[2] = {OXOD,OxOA};
in_buffer3[3] = {Ox1B,Ox41,8};
in_buffer4[2] = {Ox1B,OX32};

BYTE

dev_name[5] = {'L','P','T','1',0};

I*

*I

main{)
{

int n,counter,check,N,i,delta,nmaxs,nmins;
FILE •infile;
double x,y,z;
float maxt,mint,b,bl;

I* print screen •/

extern prtscr {) ;
SHANDLE vio hdl
SHANDLE kbd-hdl
UINT wait2 ;; 1;
SEL MMl;

/* integer var. */
/* stream pointer */

O;
O;

/* video handle */
/* keyboard handle */
/* reserved */
/* dummy selector •/

struct VIOPHYSBUF PVBPrt2;
struct =VIOMODEINFO CGAm;
struct _VIOMODEINFO STDm;

I* physical buffer •/
/* CGA structure */
/* so x 25 struct */

PVBPrt2.pBuf = {BYTE far *J(OxBSOOO);
PVBPrt2.cb • Ox4000;

/* buffer start */
/* buffer size •/

CGAm.cb • 12;
CGAm.fbType = 7;
CGAm.color = 2;
CGAm.col • 40;
CGAm.. row = 25;

/* struct length •/

/* CGA mode */
/* CGA color */
/* text columns */
/* text rows */

Figure 4.28 The program dja.c, which plots t1le Dow Jones activity.

214

OS/2 and C

CGAm.hres = 320;
CGAm.vres = 200;

I* CGA hor res */
I* CGA vert res •/

STDm.cb = 12;
STDm.fbType = l;
STDm.color = 4;

/* struct length */
I* 80 x 25 mode */
/* STD color */
I* text columns */
/* text rows */
I* STD hor res */
I* STD vert res */

STDm.col = SO;

STDm.row = 25;

STDm.hres = 720;
STDm.vres

= 400;

lkbd_buf.cb

I* buffer size */

SO;

printf("Input database filename\n");
gets(FNl);
if( (infile = fopen(FNl, "r")) == NULL)

/*library routine*/

{

printf("Input file failure: %s" ,FNl);
exit(l);
)

fscanf(infile,"%:d ",&counter);

/*no. records*/

for(n • l;n <= counter;n++)
(

fscanf(infile,"%d %d %f ",&month[n),&year[n),&value[n]);
printf("%5d %5d %6.0f \n",month[n),year[n],value[n));
)

if((check = fclose(infile)) != O)
(

printf("Error in input file close");

exit(l);
)

mint = l.e4;
maxt = o.o;

/* reverse limit */
/* reverse limit */

N = counter;
for(i = l;i <= N;i++)

/* max/min */

(

if(maxt < value[i])
maxt = value[i];

if(mint > value[i])
mint
value[i];
/* Set scale */
delta = maxt - mint;

delta = delta/10;
if(delta < 1)
delta = l;

if(delta > 1 && delta < 5)
delta
5;
if(delta > 5 && delta < 10)
delta

10;

if(delta > 10 && delta < 50)
delta
50;
if(delta > 50 && delta < 100)
delta
100;
if(delta > 100 && delta < 500)
delta
500;
if(delta > 500)
(

printf(" delta> 500 11 ) ;

exit(l);
}

nmaxs = maxt/delta + 1;

nmins = mint/delta;

Figure 4.28 (Continued)

Chap. 4

Sec. 4.4

Other Programs

215

maxt = delta•nmaxs;

mint = delta•nmins;
if(mint <= O)
mint = mint - delta;

/* scaled min •/

x = mint;

/* scaled max */

y = fabs(x);
z = (float) (y);
bl = (z)/((float) (x));
if(maxt > z && bl < O)
mint = -maxt;
else
{

if(maxt < z && bl < O)
maxt
z;
b = 150./(maxt - mint);
for(i = l;i <= N;i++)

/*plot coords •;

(

value(i] = 25. + (150. - b•(value(i] - mint));
xx[i] = 25. + (i - 1)*(256./(float) (N));
)

/* CGA mode */
VioSetMode(((struct _VIOMODEINFO far•)&CGAm),vio_hdl);
cclsCGA(vio_hdl);

/* clear screen */

VioScrLock(wait2,(char far *)dstatl,vio_hdl);

/* lock buffer •/

/* get physical buf •/
VioGetPhysBuf((struct _VIOPHYSBUF far •)&PVBPrt2,vio_hdl);
MMl = PVBPrt2.asel(OJ;
box_norm(MMl) ;

/* selector •/
/* plot box */
/* plot points */

for (n=l;n<=(N-1) ;n++)
pltpt(xx(n],xx(n+l],value[n],value[n+l],MMl);
prtscr(MMl);

/*print screen *I

VioscrUnLock(vio_hdl);

/*unlock buffer*/

KbdStringin((char far *)kbd_buf,
/*hesitate*/
((struct STRINGINBUF far •)&lkbd_buf),
wait,kbd_hdl) ;
/* STD mode */
VioSetMode(((struct _VIOMODEINFO far •)&STDm),vio_hdl);
OosExit(action,error code);

}

-

box_norm(SEL MM)
{

int xxbeg,xxend,yybeg,yyend;
xxbeg

/* box parameters */

25;

xxend
281;
yybeg = 25;
yyend = 175;
bboxx(xxbeg,xxend,yybeg,yyend,MM);
)

Figure 4.28 (Continued)

/* draw box •;

216

OS/2 and C

Chap. 4

cclsCGA(SHANDLE vio_hdl1)
{

SEL MM;
UINT waitl = l;
struct _VIOPHYSBUF PVBPrtl;

/* physical buffer •/

PVBPrtl.pBuf = (BYTE far*) (OxBSOOO);
PVBPrtl.cb = Ox4000;

/* phys buf start •/
/* buffer length */

VioScrLock(waitl, (char far *)dstat,vio_hdll);

/* lock screen */

VioGetPhysBuf((struct _VIOPHYSBUF far *)&PVBPrtl,vio_hdl1);
MM= PVBPrt1.asel[O];

/* selector •/

clrCGA(MM);

/* CGA clear •/

VioScrUnLock(vio_hdl1);

/* unlock buffer */

)

clrCGA(SEL MM)
{

int n;
int N1 = Ox1F3F;

/* end odd buffer •/
/* even offset */
/* pointer scr buf •/

int DM = Ox2000;

PCHAR ptr;
for(n = O;n <• Nl;n++)
{

ptr = MAKEP(MM,n);

/* odd far pointer */
/* clear odd buffer */

*ptr = O;
)

for(n = O;n <= Nl;n++)
{

ptr = MAKEP(MM,DM+n);

/* even far pointer */
/* clear even buffer */

*ptr = O;
}

Figure 4.28

(Concluded)

Dow Jones Industrials
3000

:>.,

··...........

.........

2250

·----f-···------

1500

1986

1987

1988

1989

Figure 4.29 Annotated plot of Dow Jones activity through the October 1987
crash.

Sec. 4.4

Other Programs

217

4.5 SUMMARY
This chapter has served to illustrate the OS/2 and C programming language interface. C represents a higher degree of abstraction than does assembler. The IBM
Toolkit provides a complete set of types and API function prototypes to permit highlevel access to the API services. The low-level nature of these services is illustrated
in the C context.
Graphics under C are developed and a new print screen routine in C is presented that allows a screen dump in graphics mode. This screen dump program is
designed for operation with CGA mode. The standard C syntax is presented and a
knowledge of this syntax is assumed as a prerequisite to understanding the chapter.
The creation of multitasking routines is developed using multiple threads and
processes. Finally, the issues associated with programming multitasked routines in C
are developed through program examples. This chapter is necessarily introductory
and establishes a basis for programming OS/2 applications using the C language.

REFERENCES
1. Microsoft Optimizing C Compiler Version 5.1, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA,
1988.
2. IBM C/2, Language Reference and Fundamentals, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1987.
3. Operating System/2 Programmer's Toolkit Version 1.0 and 1.1, Programmer's Guide,
International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1987.
4. Godfrey, J. T., Applied C: The IBM Microcomputers, Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1990.
5. Kernighan, B. W., and Ritchie, D. M., The C Programming Language, Prentice-Hall
Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1988.
6. Operating System/2 Technical Reference, Vols. 1 and 2, International Business Machines
Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1988.
7. Schildt, H., OS/2 Programming: An Introduction, Osborne McGraw-Hill, Berkeley, CA,
1988, p. 174.

PROBLEMS
4.1 When using the IBM Toolkit definitions, what precaution must be used between Versions 1.0 and 1.1?
4.2 What are the implications for the standard C 1/0 library running under the Protected
Mode of OS/2?
4.3 The Version 5.1 of the Microsoft C Optimizing Compiler passes formal parameters
with type specifications for these parameters appearing in the function definition.
Typically, a function definition such as

218

OS/2 and C
INT box_norm(waitt,

float

x,

float

Chap. 4

y)

replaces
INT box_norm(waitt,
INT waitt;
float x,y;

4.4
4.5

4.6

x,

y)

The type specification moves within the formal parameter list itself. What characteristic of this type definition remains consistent across formal parameter types?
In Figure 4.1, why must the input word integer be less than 32,768?
The OS/2 references dictate the manner in which the API services must be loaded on
the stack. Using the normal C calling convention, what parameter access on the local
stack exists? How does the Toolkit modify the API calls to load the local stack correctly for access?
What does the syntax
CHAR FAR *ptr;

mean? Why is the following acceptable?
CHAR FAR

4.7
4.8

*shrname =

What does the function MAKEP (sel,off) accomplish?
In Figure 4.5b, what is the significance of the following?
PVBPrt2.pBuf

4.9

"\ \SHAREMEM\ \SDATl. DAT";

=

(BYTE

far

*)(OxBBOOO);

What is wrong with the code
float y;
double t;
y

=

sin(2.*

PI

*t);

Assume that PI is defined as
#define

PI

3 .141592 654

4.10 What differentiates uwdot() from wdot()? (See Figure 4.6.)
4.11 In pltpt() and upltpt() (Figure 4.6) the x-values are associated with column values and
the y-values are associated with row values. Explain.
4.12 In setting up the printer for a dump of the display, the following command is used
(Figure 4.9b):

Sec. 4.4

Other Programs

219

DosWrite(dev_hand,in_buffer,bytesinl,(PUSHORT)&bytesort);

Here bytesinl =4 and
BYTE

in_bufferl[4] = {Ox1B,Ox4B,64,1};

What is the significance of this output value?
4.13 What is the meaning of the DosWrite() execution in Figure 4.9b with in_buffer3[]
defined as
BYTE

in_buffer3[3] = {Ox1B,Ox41,8};

4.14 In Figure 4.llb, are the semaphores used RAM semaphores or system semaphores?
4.15 What is characteristic about all the API function calls and their associated formal
parameters?
4.16 What is the generic mechanism used by the semaphore calling sequence to ensure
synchronization between two processes? Between two threads?
4.17 In Figure 4.12, what is the purpose of accessing the shared segment?
4.18 When creating a thread within a process, how is the thread's stack handled?
4.19 Throughout the examples of this chapter, error checking for such actions as creating a
thread have been deleted from the basic code. Please comment on this lack of error
checking intrinsic to the programs.
4.20 In the program tetra.c (Figure 4.19), what are the basic vertex points used for the
tetrahedron?
4.21 In Figure 4.28, where does the routine dja.c acquire the function bboxx()?

5 Additional OS/2
Considerations

In Chapter 4, C programming for the OS/2 full-screen mode was presented. We saw
that the C code required low-level access for many operations that call API functions. C has the advantages afforded high-level languages as well as low-level access to the operating system via these API services. Hence C is an ideal candidate
language for programming OS/2. Occasionally, a need will exist for generating a
special-purpose routine in assembly language and interfacing it to C program code.
The methodology for accomplishing this is discussed in Section 5.1.
The Microsoft linker, which comes with the C compiler utilities, serves to load
and link the object modules required by a program. When an .exe program is generated by the linker, all needed object modules must be input to the link process.
This can be cumbersome, especially when large library files are called by the linker.
OS/2 possesses the capability for two types of dynamic linking using dynamic
linked libraries (DLL), where external references can be resolved by means other
221

222

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

than the static linking normally employed. DLL satisfy external references either
during loading, load-time linking, or at run-time, run-time linking. In the former case
all external references are satisfied by the linker through knowledge of where the
DLL routines reside. In this case a priori knowledge about the location of the
needed DLL routines exists even though these routines are not located within the
.exe module at linking. When a program begins execution the DLL routines are
loaded, when called, based on this knowledge of where these routines reside. In runtime linking, the DLL routines are located at the time they are called and then
loaded. The latter approach takes slightly longer than load-time linking but leaves
the basic executable module unencumbered.
Why would OS/2 implement dynamic linked libraries? Primarily because of
the multitasking feature. Since multitasking and memory management require movement into and out of memory, it is desirable to keep executable modules as small as
possible. DLL management is one technique for achieving small executable modules.
In Section 5.2 we address DLL implementation. In the remainder of the chapter we
consider programming conventions, take a brief additional look at the API, and
study a representative C example.

5.1 MIXED-LANGUAGE PROGRAMMING AND OS/2

We have seen how both assembly language and C code can be used for programming under OS/2. C code is preferred as the level of abstraction or task complexity increases. C, however, yields less optimized object code than does assembly language programming. Hence for critical applications, C routines must be interfaced
to assembly language modules. This is particularly true when hardware is to be
accessed directly or execution speed is important. In this section, where we address
the integration of C and assembler, we will assume that the C modules call assembler modules when appropriate.
Assembler has a basic template for setup to interface to Microsoft C:

TITLE.,.

;

Description •••

_DATAl
VARl
_DATAl

SEGMENT BYTE PUBLIC
PUBLIC _VARl,.,,
ENDS

'DATA'

Sec. 5.1

Mixed-Language Programming and OS/2

_TEXT

_Function

223

SEGMENT BYTE PUBLIC 'CODE'
ASSUME CS:_TEXT,DS:_DATAl
PUBLIC _Function*
PROC NEAR
PUSH BP
MOV BP,SP
SUB SP, 10
PUSH BX
PUSH ex
PUSH DX
PUSH SI
PUSH DI
PUSH DS
MOV AX,SEG _DATAl
MOV DS,AX
(main body)

_Function
_TEXT

MOV AX, •••
POP DS
POP DI
POP SI
POP DX
POP ex
POP BX
MOV SP,BP
POP BP
RET
ENDP
ENDS
EMO

To interpret this template, consider first the segment definitions. Two segments
are defined: _TEXT and _DATAl, the code segment and the data segment, respectively. The data segment is not _DATA because all parameters from the calling data
segment will be passed using the stack. Hence there is no need to keep the "old"
data segment during execution of the assembler code. The new segment, _DATAl,
is optional as needed. Following definition of the segment registers using ASSUME,
a procedure, _Function, is defined. This function must be PUBLIC so that it can be
called externally. Upon entry to the procedure, a return address will be pushed on
the stack. This address is an offset (2 bytes) for NEAR calls. After the call the
calling routine has its frame pointer in the BP register. This pointer serves as the
basis for moving from frame to frame. The template requires pushing this address on
the stack. Four bytes now reside on the stack for a NEAR call. The stack pointer
now contains the new frame pointer, which is loaded into BP, and space is allocated

224

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

on the stack by advancing the stack pointer 10 bytes (as an example). These steps
are accomplished with the code
PUSH

BP

MOV

BP,SP

SUB

SP, 10

Next, the general-purpose registers (except AX) and the index registers are pushed
on the stack. Finally, the old data segment address (appearing in DS) is saved on the
stack and a new data segment address for _DATAl is loaded into DS.
The parameters passed to the assembler reside starting at [BP+4] because a
return address and a frame pointer have been loaded. Assuming that all parameters
are of type int, they will reference as [BP+4], [BP+6], [BP+8], and so on. Clearly,
other data types will occupy space accordingly. The return values from the assembler routine will occupy AX or AX and DX. At this point all pushed registers are
popped, the caller's frame pointer restored, and the return address accessed. This,
then, briefly describes the template for interfacing assembler to C.
Figure 5.1 illustrates a C program that reads an upper and lower frequency, a
number of iterations, and an individual tone duration (in milliseconds). The program
generates a musical or tone scale at intervals of 100 Hz for the range of frequencies
spanned by the upper and lower frequencies. This C program calls an assembly
language routine, scaleslQ, which accesses the tone generator. This assembly language routine appears in Figure 5.2 and follows the normal assembly language
template for the C interface [1]. Note that the main portion of this routine simply
passes the formal parameters to @DosBeep. In this case the frequency, freq, is
passed at [BP+4] and the duration, dduration, is passed at [BP+6]. The inclusion
!Fl

include sysmac. inc

END IF

loads the API services as required.
The routine scalesl.asm, which appears in Figure 5.2, was assembled with the
instruction
masm scalesl

The C program appearing in Figure 5.1 was compiled using
cl -c -Zi;

scales.c

The linking was accomplished as
link scales+scalesl,

scales, ,doscalls,,, /CO

Sec. 5.1

225

Mixed-Language Programming and OS/2

I* Thia proqram qeneratea scales and
* calla an assembler routine */

#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
#include <stdio.h>
UINT low_freq,hiqh_freq,no_iterations,dduration;
UINT action - O;
UINT error_code

O;

main()
printf("Input lower frequency (Hz) - inteqer\n");
scanf("t:d 11 ,&low_freq);
printf("Input hiqher frequency (Hz)·- inteqer\n");
scanf("td",&hiqh freq);
printf("Input nuiiiber iterations \n");
scanf("td",&no_iterations);
printf("Input component duration \n");
scanf("td",&dduration);
sscale();

/* tone qenerator */

DosExit(action,error_code);
}

sscale()
{

extern scalesl();
int freq,n,m,N;

I* assembler module *I

low freq ~ low freq/100;
low:freq • low:freq * 100;

I* normalize */

if(low freq <• 100)
low:freq = 200;
hiqh freq = hiqh freq/100;
hiqh:freq • hiqh:freq * 100;
m == O;
N • (hiqh_freq - low_freq)/100;

while(m <• no_iterations)
{

for(n = l;n <• N;n++)
{

freq • low freq + n •100;

scalesl(freq,dduration);
}

for(n • l;n <= H;n++)
{

freq = hiqh freq - n * 100;
scalesl(freq,dduration);
l

m++;

I* minimum set */
I* normalize */
I* initialize loop *I
I* no. tone points *I
I* check limit *I
I* up-scale */
I* set frequency *I
I* tone */
I* down-scale */
I* set frequency *I
I* tone */
I* increment loop */

}

Figure 5.1 C program to generate musical scale based on input frequencies and
time duration.

226

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

PAGE 40,132
TITLE scalesl - Routine to generate scales (saclesl.asm)
;

DESCRIPTION: This routine generates various tones.
[BP+4) contains the frequency and [BP+6) contains
the duration in millisec.
I Fl
include sysmac.inc
ENDIF
_TEXT

SEGMENT BYTE PUBLIC 'CODE'
ASSUME CS: TEXT
PUBLIC scalesl
_scalesl
-PROC NEAR
push BP
mov BP,SP
sub SP,8
push DI
push SI
push AX
push BX
push ex
push DX
;Begin beep
@DosBeep [BP+4],[BP+6]
pop DX
pop ex
pop BX
pop AX
pop SI
pop DI
mov SP,BP
pop BP
ret
scalesl
-TEXT
ENDS
END

ENDP

Figure 5.2 C-callable assembly language routine to generate tonals.

5.2 DYNAMIC LINKING AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

Dynamic linking is a method of generating an executable program where not all
modules are loaded into the execute file at link time but are loaded on demand
during execution [2]. Under OS/2 a single code segment can be accessed by multiple programs, and such reentrant code facilitates dynamic linked library (DLL)
usage, where simultaneous access of a library routine is possible. This is in keeping
with the goal of minimizing code in a multitasking environment.
The two types of dynamic linking, load-time linking and run-time linking,
serve distinctly different needs. Load-time linking involves complete knowledge of
where a needed external routine resides prior to execution and is appropriate for frequently used routines. Run-time linking requires locating and installing external
routines upon their call from an executing program. This form of linking is used
primarily for accessing routines on an infrequent basis.

Sec. 5.2

Dynamic Linking and Resource Management

227

5.2.1 Using Dynamic Linked Libraries
We have seen that dynamic linked libraries (DLL) are useful when it is desirable to
minimize the amount of code linked with multiple executable routines or tasks in a
multitasking environment. It is in support of multitasking that DLL can contribute
significantly. The run-time dynamic linking circumvents this situation where a DLL
can be released from an executable module.
There are actually three types of linked modules possible when dynamic linking is employed:

1. Load-time dynamic Linking
a. Preloaded DLL
b. Load on Call DLL
2. Run-time dynamic Linking
a. Explicit Load and Call
To fully appreciate the nuances among these options, we must examine the concept
of a definition file, where one of these options is determined for each DLL implementation. Briefly, the preloaded DLL requires that these DLL routines be loaded at
the start of execution. The load on call DLL implies that the code be loaded as each
DLL routine is called by the executing program using guidance in the definition file.
Finally, the explicit load and call situation for run-time dynamic linking requires that
the DLL be accessed using API services. We will consider each type of DLL access
in Section 5.2.4.
The LINK utility is used to join object routines into executable modules that
have all their external references accounted for. The linker is used to create either
a DLL or an executable, .exe, file. How does this work? Basically, the module
definition file (.def) specifies whether or not a particular output (from the linker) is
to be a DLL or an .exe file. This definition file also includes a number of statements
that can be used to tailor executable code to accomplish various optimizations. It includes information that distinguishes between a DLL or application, a list of imported and exported functions (see below), the size of the stack and heap, and a
number of options for the code and data segments. The latter option allows specification of whether or not segments are to be preloaded or loaded on demand. When
using the linker we have noticed that a prompt for a definition file always occurs as
the last entry in the linker prompt sequence. So far we have left this entry blank,
which is an appropriate default for applications. We will now use this prompt to
supply a .def file where appropriate.

5.2.2 The Definition File
Table 5.1 illustrates the allowed (and in some cases the mutually exclusive) statements that can appear in the module definition file. The first two statements are
either NAME or LIBRARY. The former specifies the name of an application (.exe)
and the latter specifies the name of a DLL (.dll). The description (DESCRIPTION)

Additional OS/2 Considerations

228

Chap. 5

merely states in prose the module purpose. The statement PROTMODE specifies
that a module is to run under Protected Mode. The statement
CODE

[load] [shared] [execute] [privilege]

is used to define the default attributes for all the module's code segments. Subsequent statements using the SEGMENTS key word can override this statement
(CODE) to tailor segment usage. In the CODE statement above, [load] is used to
specify whether or not the code segments are physically loaded at the start of execution or on demand. This option has two possible values: PRELOAD (for loading
at start of execution) and LOADONCALL (for demand loading).
The next option, [shared], specifies whether code segments in a DLL are to be
accessed by all tasks needing these segments as a single instance or as multiple
instances (where duplicate copies of the DLL routine are generated). This option has
two possible values: SHARED (where only one copy of the code segment exists) or
NONSHARED (where a unique copy of the code segments is loaded for each reference). The option [execute] allows code segments to remain distinct through the
value EXECUTEONLY. In this case the code segment selector cannot be loaded
into DS. The alternative value, EXECUTEREAD, permits the segment selector to be
loaded into DS. Finally, [privilege] is used to give code segments 1/0 privilege at
level 2 by having IOPL specified.
TABLE 5.1 MODULE DEFINITION FILE STATEMENTS

Statement

Comments

NAME
Declares a module as an application
LIBRARY
Declares a module as a DLL module
DESCRIPTION
Defines module descriptively
PROTMODE
Declares a module as a Protected Mode routine
CODE (load](shared](execute][privilege]
[load]: specified whether code loaded at the start of execution
(PRELOAD) or on demand (LOADONCALL)
[shared]: one copy of code loaded (SHARED) or multiple
copies loaded with tasks (NONSHARED)
(execute]: (EXECUTEONLY)-code segments can only be
executed; or (EXECUTEREAD)-they can be read as well
(privilege]: allows code segment I/0 capability
(IOPL)
DATA [load](instance][shared](write][privilege]
(load]: specifies whether code loaded at the start of execution
(PRELOAD) or on demand (LOADONCALL)
[instance]: no automatic data segment created (NONE), all
instances share the same automatic data segment
(SINGLE),and multiple copies for each instance (MULTIPLE)
(shared]: same copy of a segment shared (SHARED) and new
copies loaded for each instance (NONSHARED)

Sec. 5.2

Dynamic Linking and Resource Management

229

TABLE 5.1 (Concluded)

Statement

(READWRITE)
SEGMENTS

IMPORTS

Comments

[write]: specifies that a memory segment can be written to
or only read (READONLY)
[segname] [CLASS(' classname ')][minalloc] [segflags]
[segname]: name of segment whose attributes are to be
changed
[classname]: 'CODE' or 'DATA'
[minalloc]: minimum number of bytes reserved for segment
[segflags]: attributes assigned to segment
[intname]modulename.[entryname or entryordinal]
[intname]: name to be used within importing module
modulename: application library that contains functions
[ entryname] : entry point to DLL routine
(entryordinal]: DLL routine ordinal position

EXPORTSentryname[=intname][@ordinal][RESIDENTNAME][NODATA]argnum
entryname: name to be used by accessing routines
[intname]: real name of routine
[@ordinal]: defines the routine's ordinal value within export
module
[RESIDENTNAME]: used with @ordinal argument to specify
resident always
[NODATA]: if present, specifies no stack or automatic data
segment
argnum: number of parameters to be received or IOPL
STACKSIZE
Number of bytes an application or DLL needs for its own
stack
HEAPSIZE
Number of bytes in application or DLL heap
STUB
Name of a DOS 3.x program to replace an application or
library invoked in Real Mode instead of correctly specifying Protected Mode

The statement
DATA [load][instance](shared][write][privilege]

is used to specify the default attributes for all the module's data segments. The first,
[load], is the same as for the CODE statement except that LOADONCALL is the
default option when no load argument is specified. The option [instance] describes
the automatic data segment, which is the physical segments(s) represented by the
name dgroup. This segment(s) contains the local heap and stack area for an application. It can take one of three values: NONE (no automatic segment), SINGLE (all
application instances share the same automatic data segment), and MULTIPLE (default value where each instance has its own automatic data segment).
The argument [shared] parallels the [instance] value. It has two values:
SHARED (same copy of a segment is shared by multiple instances of an applica-

Additional OS/2 Considerations

230

Chap. 5

tion) and NONSHARED (new copies of data segments are loaded for each instance
of an application; this is the default value). The [shared] argument and the [instance] argument must match. If a conflict arises, all segments in dgroup are shared,
and all others are nonshared.
The argument [write] specifies whether the data segments can be written to or
not: READONLY (cannot be written) and READWRITE (default option; the segment can be written to as well as read). The argument [privilege] is the same as for
CODE. The statement
SEGMENTS
(segname](CLASS('classname')][minalloc](segflags]

is used to assign attributes individually to code. or data segments. The parameter
[segname] denotes the segment label and can be q~clared as 'CODE' or 'DATA' via
the classname. The default is 'CODE'. Each ~11gment is allocated a minimum
number of bytes: [minalloc]. The argument [segflags] can be any combination of
arguments specified above with CODE or DATA segments.
The form of the IMPORTS statement is
IMPORTS
[intname]

modulename.

[entrynamelentryordinal]

Here intname specifies the internally used name of the importing module as it calls
an external entry point (the ASCII string, entryname, within the DLL). The parameter modulename is the name of the application or DLL containing the needed functions, and entryordinal merely identifies entryname by its ordinal position with the
DLL.
The form of the EXPORTS statement is
EXPORTS
entryname(=intname)[@ordinal][RESIDENTNAME)[NODATA)argnum

This statement defines the routines within a DLL or application that are to be
available for other programs. Alternatively, it can be used to specify routines that are
to have level 2 1/0 privileges. The argument entryname defines the name that calling modules will use when accessing the exported routine. The parameter [=intname]
is the real name appearing in the exporting routine. The [@ordinal] parameter defines the routine's ordinal value within the module.
The argument [RESIDENTNAME] is used only when [@ordinal] is specified
and it indicates that the function's name must be resident at all times and, consequently, the name and ordinal value will be stored in the DLL export table. The
[NODATA] argument means that the export routines will have neither a stack nor
an automatic data segment. Finally, argnum takes on the value IOPL when the export routine is to have level 2 privilege.
STACKSIZE specifies the number of bytes an application or DLL needs for

Sec. 5.2

Dynamic Linking and Resource Management

231

the local stack. Similarly, HEAP SIZE specifies the number of bytes an application
or DLL needs for its local heap. STUB specifies the name of a DOS executable file
to be run in place of a Protected Mode application or library when such applications
or libraries are invoked under Real Mode.
5.2.3 Creating a DLL
In the preceding section we saw examples of the use of IMPORT and EXPORT in
the definition file. IMPORT specifies the routines that will be used by an executable
file and incorporated at load or run time, as indicated in the application definition
file. EXPORTS specifies the routines that will be transferred to the executable file
at load or run time from the DLL, as indicated in the DLL definition file.
To see this work, consider the creation of a DLL and its incorporation with
other modules. The following sequence of steps corresponds to Example 1 in Section 5.2.4, where the program code will be specified:
link dyninit.obj

dlinkl.obj,

dynll.dll,

doscalls.lib,

dynll,def

This link statement links dyninit and dlinkl (both object modules) to create dynll.
We assume that dynll.defhas the LIBRARY option with dynll specified. Then the
created routine has the .dll extension, denoting it as a dynamic linked library. The
single library, doscalls.lib, imports the API service routines. Hence, from the foregoing process comes the DLL, dynl 1.dll.
Dynamic linked libraries must be linked with applications as libraries, not .dll
files. Hence the import library utility, implib, can be used to create this library based
on the definition file. The routines above, for example, are in dynl 1.dll, but the
entry points can be specified in dynll.lib, which is created as follows:
implib dynll.lib dynll.def

Here implib creates dynll.lib, which has the entry points specified by the EXPORT
table in dynll.def.
The last step is to create the application run file and satisfy all external references through library access (as an example). Assume that the application exists as
an object module named dynl.obj. The link procedures will be
link dynl.obj,

dynl.exe, ,doscalls. lib dynll. lib,,

Here dynl.exe is the output for dynl.obj and uses both doscalls.lib (the API service) and dynll.lib (the library file for the DLL). During execution of dynl.exe the
DLL routines will be accessed via the dynll.lib table (these DLL routines reside in
dynll.dll).
The importance of specifying EXPORT and IMPORT files should now be
clear. It is the only way of identifying DLL routines to the implib utilities that create
the DLL needed library file. This file points to the available DLL routines (this file
is output from implib with extension .lib).

232

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

5.2.4 DLL Examples
In the preceding section we outlined how to create a DLL using an appropriately
constructed module definition file. Both the link and implib utilities were used in
this process. File names were specified without actually presenting the files themselves, in order that the mechanics of the linking process could be illustrated. By
way of introducing an example, the code is now presented for the files in question.

Example 1. Figure 5.3 shows the main application program, dynl.asm, which

PAGE 40,132
TITLE DYNl - Main calling program example #l (dynl.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This program calls dynll.dll to demonstrate
preloaded assembler dynamic link libraries •
• 286c
.sall

;Suppresses macro lists

.xlist
INCL_BASE equ l
include 052.INC
.list
extrn dlinkl:FAR
dgroup

GROUP

data

STACK
STACK

SEGMENT PARA
STACK 'STACK'
db
64 dup( 'STACK
')
ENDS

data

SEGMENT PARA

msgl
msgl_l
msg2
msg2_1

db
equ
db
equ

;defines automatic data seg

PUBLIC 'DATA'

'Dynamic Link Pre-loaded Routine',ODH,OAH

&-msgl
'Error on access OLL',ODH,OAH

$-msg2

;

action equ
result dw
vio_hdl equ

;code to end thread
;return code for error
;video handle

0
0
0

data

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA
PUBLIC 'CODE'
ASSUME CS:CSEG,DS:dgroup
PROC
FAR

DYNl

lea bx,msg

;push message segment
;offset of message

push bx
push msgl_l

;save offset
;message length

push ds

call dlinkl

;DLL routine to print msg

cmp ax,o

;check for error

;

;jump if OK

je EXIT
@VioWrtTTY

msg2,msg2_1,vio_hdl

@DosExit
ENDP
ENDS
END DYNl

action, result

EXIT:
DYNl
CSEG

Figure 5.3 Main dynamic link library calling program, illustrating preloaded
DLL routines.

Sec. 5.2

Dynamic Linking and Resource Management

233

imports routines from the DLL. It is this file that must be linked with doscalls.lib
and dynll.lib to create the application executable module. The data segment for this
module is named data and the code segment is CSEG. In the figure three values are
pushed to the stack: first, the data segment address for data; second, the offset
address for msgl; and finally, the length of msgl is pushed. These values will
eventually be accessed using a structure (template) and the stack starting address.
During a push operation a variable is placed on the stack and then the stack pointer
is decreased. Hence the stack loads as
msgl_l
offset of msgl
segment address of msgl

(lowest address)
(next lower address)
(highest address)

Following this loading of the stack a call to the DLL routine (dlinkl) is made.
The operating system automatically places a return address (4 bytes for a FAR call)
on the stack in response to the call instruction. Figure 5.4 illustrates the called procedure, dlinkl, contained in the module dlinkl.asm. The first instruction of the
called procedure saves the old (current) value of bp and sp now points to this saved
copy of bp. Recognizing that the stack pointer is decreased following each push, the
following stack values appear on the local stack:
caller's bp
caller's ip
caller's cs
msgl_l
offset of msgl
segment address of msgl

(lowest address)

(highest address)

In the routine dlinkl the next instruction transfers the value in sp (which is the
saved copy of the old bp's address) to bp. The routine pushes ds (which points to
the dynl.asm data segment) and loads the DLL routines's data segment address into
ds. The program can now access structures of the form specified by stl, which
appears in the new data segment. This access takes the form
variable.field

where the fields specified for stl are m_len, m_offs, and m_seg. There are also three
unnamed fields. Choosing variable equal to the address of the old bp, we can access
the stack using the structure template. Hence the following values of interest can be
retrieved by the DLL routine:

234

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

PAGE 40,132
TITLE DLINKl -- DLL routine for example #1 (dlinkl.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This is the DLL routine for example #1.
It is pre-loaded •

extrn

• 286c
.sall

;Suppresses macro listings

VioWrtTTY:FAR

;API routine

dgroup GROUP data_dlll
;

data_dlll

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'

;

vio_hdl equ O
stl

dw
dw
dw
m len
dw
m=offs dw
m_seg
dw
ENDS
stl
data_dlll
CODEl
dlinkl

;video handle

;parameter structure

struc
?
?
?
?
?
?

;caller's bp
;caller's ip
;caller's cs
;message length
;message ptr offset
;message ptr seq

ENDS

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
ASSUME CS:CODEl,DS:dgroup
PUBLIC dlinkl
PROC
FAR
mov bp,sp

;caller's frame ptr
;local stack

push ds

;caller's ds

mov ax,data_dlll

;load new ds

push bp

mov ds,ax
;use explicit parameter
;values because locations
;come from local stack

dlinkl
CODEl

push [bp] .m_seg
push [bp].m_offs
push [bp].m_len
push vio_hdl

;message seg address
;message offset address
;length message
;video handle

call FAR ptr VioWrtTTY

;direct API call

pop ds
pop bp
ret
ENDP
ENDS
END

;restore caller's data seg

;restore frame pointer

Figure 5.4 The called procedure, dlinkl, for the example of Figure 5.3.
[bp] .m_len - length of msgl
[bp] .m_offs - the offset of msgl
[bp] .m_seg - the segment address of msgl

In dlinkl these values are pushed on the stack as well as the video handle and a
FAR call to
VioWrtTTY

is made. Note that macro version is not used and the API service directly accessed.

Sec. 5.2

Dynamic Linking and Resource Management

235

Execution of these instructions results in the message "Dynamic Link Preloaded
Routine" appearing on the screen with a line feed and carriage return.
The routine dlinkl is a member of the DLL, dynll.dll module created by the
first link discussed above. This routine, dlinkl.obj, was linked with a routine
dyninit.obj. What is this routine? Each DLL must have an initialization routine. For
dynll.dll the initialization routine is dyninit.obj and this routine appears in Figure
5.5. This initialization routine simply writes the message "DLL Initialized" to the
screen and forces the operating system to initialize the DLL. To ensure that the initialization routine executes first the DLL entry point to the module's procedure, init
is specified as a parameter in the END pseudo-op: END init. Following initialization
the routine must return a value of 1, not 0, to the calling program.

PAGE 40,132
TITLE DYNINIT -- Initialization Routine for DLL-1 (dyninit.asm)

DESCRIPTION: This routine is the initialization routine
for the DLL dynll.dll.

The routine merely prints a message .

• 286c

;Suppresses macro listings

.sall

.xlist

dgroup

include sysmac.inc
.list

;include API services

GROUP init_data

;defines automatic data seg

init_data

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'DATA'

initOK equ
msg
db
msg_l
equ
vio_hdl equ

1

init_data

ENDS

CINIT
ASSUME
init

1 DLL Initialized',ODH,OAH
$-msg

0

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
CS:CINIT,DS:dgroup
PROC
FAR
push bp

init
CINIT

;OK return code
;Initialization message
;message length
;video handle

;save frame pointer

@VioWrtTTY msg,msg_l,vio_hdl

;Write initialization msg

mov ax, initOK

;OK return value

pop bp
ret
ENDP
ENDS
END init

;restore frame pointer

;DLL entry point

Figure 5.5 The initialization routine for the DLL called by the program in
Figure 5.3.

236

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

Finally, Figure 5.6 presents the module definition file. This file is associated
with the library dynll.lib. Hence all references to segments and routines must come
from dlinkl.asm and dyninit.asm. In this example these segments are preloaded, as
specified in the definition file. Only dlinkl is exported because this is the only
routine used by dynl.exe. Note that the presence of LIBRARY specifies that dynll
will be a DLL.

LIBRARY

DYNll

PROTMODE
DESCRIPTION

'Example #1 DLL'

SEGMENTS

init data
CINIT
data dlll
CODEl

CLASS
'DATA'
PRE LOAD
CLASS
'DATA'
PRE LOAD

PRELOAD
PRELOAD

EXPORTS

dlinkl

Figure 5.6 The module definition file, dynll.def.

Example 2. For this example, a load-on-call execution was prescribed for the
DLL routines exported to the application. All routines remain the same as in Example 1 except the definition file, named dynll.def. This file appears in Figure 5.7.

LIBRARY

DYN22

PROTMODE
DESCRIPTION

'Example #2 DLL'

SEGMENTS

init data
CINIT
data dlll
CODEl

CLASS
'DATA'
LO ADON CALL
CLASS
'DATA'
LOADONCALL

LOADONCALL
LOADONCALL

EXPORTS

dlinkl

Figure 5.7 The module definition file, dyn22.def.

It is important to note that the data segments (init_data, for the initialization routine,
and data_dlll, for the DLL routine) in the DLL as well as the Code segments in the
DLL are loaded as called based on the parameter LOADONCALL.
The link and definition utilities are executed as follows:

Sec. 5.2

Dynamic Linking and Resource Management

link dyninit dlinkl,

237

dyn22, ,doscalls.lib,dyn22.def

implib dyn22. lib dyn22. def
link dynl.obj,

dynl.exe,,doscalls.lib dyn22.lib,,

These commands produced an executable module, dynl.exe, which accessed the
dynamic link library, dyn22.dll, and imported the routine dlinkl only when actually
called in the program dynl.exe. In the earlier example access was granted immediately because of the preload condition. Execution of dynl.exe produces the same
result as it did in Example 1, but the DLL input occurred at load time rather than
when linking takes place. Note that the message to the screen still reads
"DLL Initialized
Dynamic Link Preloaded Routine"

even though the load-on-call status exists. This is because we have changed only the
definition file to check this DLL implementation.

Example 3. In this example we illustrate an example of run-time dynamic
linking based on the OS/2 API services. Following the lead set by the first two
examples, the routines dyninit.asm and dlinkl.asm were used to make up the DLL.
Figure 5.8 illustrates the main calling module, dyn2.asm.
The routine dyn2.asm uses the API service @DosLoadModule to load the
DLL (DYN33.DLL) and it returns a handle to the DLL. To access entry points
within DYN33.DLL the API services macro @DosGetProcAddr is called and an address returned for the entry DLINKl. This address is returned in addr_proc. Next the
message parameters are pushed on the stack so that they can be accessed by
DLINKl. A call is made via the CALL instruction and this writes msgl to the
screen. Following release of the DLL using @DosFreeModule, the program exit
takes place. Note that the two ASCIIZ strings corresponding to the DLL and the
entry point name have uppercase letters. This is because the assembler always uses
uppercase and both the API functions in dyn2.asm are case sensitive. The CALL
instruction is not case sensitive; hence the references to dlinkl in dynl.asm are
unaffected by whether the reference is to dlinkl or DLLNKl. In dyn2.asm the
references must be upper case.
Figure 5.9 illustrates the DLL definition file for Example 3. There are few
changes in this file (DYN33.DEF) from earlier .def files. These three examples
constitute the three ways in which dynamic link libraries can be implemented under
OS/2. The examples all employed assembly language for both the calling module
and the routines appearing in the DLL. The link sequence for Example 3 is as
follows:
link dyninit + dlinkl,dyn33, ,doscalls,dyn33.def
implib dyn33. lib dyn33 .def
link dyn2, dyn2,, doscalls+dyn33,,

238

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

PAGE 40,132
TITLE DYN2 - Main calling program example #3 (dyn2.asm)
DESCRIPTION: This program calls dyn33.dll to demonstrate
explicit load by application assembler dynamic link libraries.
The main calling routine is DYN2 •

• 286c
.sall

;Suppresses macro lists

.xlist
include sysmac.inc
.list

;API services

dgroup

GROUP

;defines automatic data seg

STACK
STACK

SEGMENT PARA
STACK 'STACK'
db
128 dup ( 'STACK
')
ENDS

data

SEGMENT PARA

msgl
msgl_l
msg2
msg2_1

db
equ
db
equ

data

PUBLIC 'DATA'

'Dynamic Link Run-Time Routine',ODH,OAH

$-msgl
'Error on access DLL',ODH,OAH

$-msg2

action equ
result dw
vio_hdl equ

0
0
0

obj_buf
obj_buf_len
obj_buf_add
name mod
hhandle

dd
dw
dd
db
dw

name_proc

db
dd

addr_proc

;code to end thread
;return code for error
;video handle

64 dup(?)
$-obj_buf
obj buf
'DYN°J3 1 ,0

0
1

DLINK1 1 , 0

;error returm buffer
;length error buffer
;address buffer
;module name
;handle to DLL module
;DLL procedure name

0

data

ENDS

CSEG

SEGMENT PARA PUBLIC 'CODE'
ASSUME CS:CSEG,DS:dgroup
PROC
FAR

DYN2

;stack defined

@DosLoadModule obj_buf_add,obj_buf_len,name_mod,hhandle
cmp ax, O
;check for error

jne ERROR
@DosBeep 4000,200
@OosGetProcAddr hhandle,name_proc,addr_proc
cmp ax,o
;check for error

jne ERROR
@DosBeep 1000,500
push ds
push bx
push msgl_l

;push message segment
;offset of message
;save offset
;message length

call addr_proc

;OLL routine to print msg

lea bx,msgl

Figure 5.8 Run-time dynamic linked library calling module.

Sec. 5.3

239

Optimizing the C Design Process

@DosFreeModule hhandle
cmp ax,o
je EXIT

;check for error

ERROR:
@VioWrtTTY

msg2,msg2_1,vio_hdl

;error message

@DosExit
ENDP
ENDS
END DYN2

action, result

;terminate all threads

EXIT:
DYN2
CSEG

Figure 5.8 (Concluded)

dyn33

LIBRARY

INITINSTANCE

PROTMODE
DATA

NONSHARED

DESCRIPTION

'Example #3 DLL'

SEGMENTS
init data
CLASS
'DATA'
CINIT
LOADONCALL
data dlll
CLASS
'DATA'
CODEl
LOADONCALL
HEAPSIZE

LOADONCALL
LOADONCALL

1024

EXPORTS
dlinkl

Figure 5.9 The module definition file, dyn33.def.

It is possible to access a DLL in an additional fashion: through specification
of IMPORTS entry points in a module definition file. By listing the library entry
points to be imported in a definition file for the application, the application can
import DLL routines.

5.3 OPTIMIZING THE C DESIGN PROCESS

Most modern textbooks address the topics of structured programming, modular code,
and top-down design. These techniques have come to embody an organized approach to program development which is repeatable in an optimal sense. This
approach is predictable and meaningful in that programmers of differing backgrounds will approach algorithm development in the same fashion when these tools
are used. In the following discussion we explore each of these topics, starting with
top-down design because it represents the start of the design process.

240

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

5.3.1 Top-Down Design, Structured Programming,
and Modular Code

Top-down design is an informal strategy for starting with a global problem statement
and then subdividing the development into smaller and smaller modules until each
module accomplishes a singular task. Such a systematic approach to design leads to
modular techniques that develop and link program elements together to solve the
overall task.
A convenient starting point for the top-down approach is to define the functional structure for the program under consideration. This functional structure has
been reflected in the Structure Charts of earlier programming examples. These charts
illustrate a hierarchy of importance for the components of the program. Structure
Charts are established by associating with level 0 an overall functional statement of
the programming problem. This occupies a single box at the top of the hierarchy.
Next, the level 1 position categories associated with variable 1/0 and algorithm
computation are indicated at a reasonably high level. Below this level, successive
reduction of the problem into multiple smaller pieces occurs, with the relationships
clearly defined. Through this process the program architecture is defined in terms of
hierarchy. The Structure Chart does not, however, illustrate the dynamic interrelationship among modular components. Also, it does not illustrate at the module level
the flow of execution for the program. To achieve this, the top-down design process needs an additional mechanism for describing program activity. This mechanism
can take one of two forms: the flowchart or pseudo-code, which describes the program activity in natural-language syntax. In this book we employ flowcharts for describing programs dynamically. (The reader can just as conveniently approach program design using pseudo-code, but it is generally less compact than flowcharts,
hence our use of the latter technique.)
In general, the procedure discussed here is a reasonable approach to program
design. The structure chart reflects the high-level functionalism and the flowcharts
illustrate the more detailed dynamics at the module level. Top-down design is informal and thus most useful for small-scale design tasks. When faced with larger design problems, the programmer must resort to additional techniques to supplement
the guidance obtained from the top-down methodology. We will consider two additional tools, as discussed earlier: modular programming and structured code.
The reader will note by now that in programs appearing in this book, there is
a tendency to relegate many of the tasks to smaller functions and modules. This
suggests the notion of modular programming. Modular programming concepts have
been established over a long period of time during which theoretical methods
evolved for designing programs [3,4]. The principal requirement on smaller program
units or modules is that they be independently testable and can be integrated to accomplish the overall program objective.
Modules are generally defined, in the context of C programming, in terms of
one or more related functions. Each function should perform a single independent
task and be self-contained, with one exit and entry point. This suggests a single

Optimizing the C Design Process

Sec. 5.3

241

"thread" to program execution, which is the manner in which most modern computers execute code. Module execution in the world of the CPU is sequential. With this
architecture in mind, it becomes straightforward to accept the one entry and one exit
feature associated with functions, at least theoretically.
We discussed global variables as a mechanism for returning more than one
value from a function. When is this likely to become most necessary? One situation
is the generation of an array of similar values. Here a single function might be used
to compute a time series, for example, and each computation would generate an
array element in recursive fashion. Obviously, the function should be self-contained
and all array values generated at once. Consider the following function:
filter (N)
int N;
{

extern float
float b, c;
int n;
y(O]=O;
b=.01;
c=.001;
for

y[ l ·

x[ J;

/*x=time element*/

/*Initialize*/

(n=l; n<=N; n++)
y[n]=c*y(n-l]+b*x(n];

}

This low-pass filter generates a smoothing of the time series x[n]. The array y[n] is
generated in its entirety with the simple one-statement for loop. It would be highly
undesirable to fail to return the complete array from this function; hence the use of
global variables is appropriate. This use does not detract from the modular nature of
the function. Thus even though a module (or function) has one entry and one exit
point, multiple values can be returned.
Size is handled by accepting a general guideline that modules contain between
10 and 100 lines of code. This is suggested as a rule of thumb and if, for example,
the code were written in APL, 100 lines would be very tiresome to debug. For C,
however, the guideline seems appropriate, as evidenced by the modules in this book.
A more rigorous enforcement of size must resort to quantitative measures such as
complexity and complexity metrics. Consider the metric [5]
N

=

Nl

+ N2

where
Nl = total number of operators in a module
N2 = total number of operands in a module

Returning to the function filter, the following counts apply:

(5.1)

242

Additional OS/2 Considerations
OPERATOR

COUNT

OPERAND

COUNT

=

6
1
1
1
2

y[O]
b

2
3

c

3

0
y[]
x[]
n
N

1

for

<

++

*

11

Chap. 5

3
2
7
3

(variable)

24

Here N is 35 [from Equation (5.1)]. What does this mean? To interpret N, a body
of statistical data must evolve based on complex interactions between programmers
and code. It is clear from this example that N 35 is a reasonably simple program.
In reference 6, a similar example with N = 28 is illustrated. Again, this metric value
indicates a relatively small and understandable module.
The programmer is unlikely to apply a complexity metric during program development. It is, nonetheless, useful to allow complexity to guide program development, particularly when modules begin to approach a high level of difficulty (for the
programmer developing the code). Let us summarize some general guidelines on
module development in C:

=

1. Restrict modules to between 10 and 100 lines of code.
2. Within the module concept, allow one entry and one exit (exception handling
can call for multiple exits, but this is an abortive condition and the error state
should be flagged before the exit).
3. Arrays should be treated globally.
4. Modules returning a single value should do so formally with returnO.
S. Modules returning multiple but small numbers of variables should do so with
pointers (pointers are complex, so the trade-off here is how many pointers are
involved).
6. Modules returning large numbers of variables, other than arrays, should be
rewritten.
7. Modules returning an intermediate number of variables can do so with global
declarations.
8. A module should perform one self-contained task.
9. Allow for exceptions to these guidelines when the code can be made easier to
understand and it is not time-critical.

272

App. A

TABLE A.2

IBM Macro Assembler/2

MACRO ASSEMBLER INSTRUCTIONS (8086 CONVENTION)

Instruction

Purpose

Comments

Arithmetic
ADC dest,src

Add with carry

ADD dest,src
DIV src

Addition
Unsigned divide

IDIV src

Signed integer
division
Signed integer
multiply
Unsigned multiply
Subtract with borrow
Subtract

IMUL src
MUL src
SBB dest,src
SUB dest,src

Performs an addition of the two operands and adds one if CF is set.
Adds the two operands.
Divides the numerand (AL and AH for
byte division and AX and DX for
word division) by src. The result
is returned in AL (byte) or AX
(word).
Signed division using the registers of
DIV.
Multiplies AL or AX times src.
Same as IMUL.
Subtracts the two operands and subtracts one if CF is set.
Subtracts the two operands.

Logical
AND dest,src

Logical AND

NEG dest
NOT dest
OR dest,src

Two's complement
Logical NOT
Logical inclusive
OR

TEST dest,src

Logical compare

XOR dest,src

Exclusive OR

Performs the bit conjunction of the two
operands: the result is zero except
when both bits are set.
Forms the two's complement of dest.
Inverts dest bit by bit.
Performs the bit logical inclusive disjunction of the two operands: returns
a one except when both bits are zero.
Performs the bit conjunction of the two
operands with only the flags affected.
Performs the bit logical exclusive disjunction of the two operands: returns
a one when one operand is zero.

Move
MOV dest,src

Move

MOVS dest-str,
src-str

Move byte or word
string

Moves:
l. To memory from AX (AL)
2. To AX (AL) from memory
3. To seg-reg from memory/reg
4. To reg from seg-reg
5. To reg from reg
To reg from memory
To memory from reg
6. To reg from immediate
7. To memory from immediate
Transfers a byte or word string from
src, addressed by SI, to dest, addressed by DI.

load
LOOS src-str

Load byte or word
string

Transfers a byte (word) from src, addressed by SI, to AL (AX) and adjusts SI.

App.A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

271

easier to implement in assembler since the API in OS/2 is presented as a generic assembler interface. C provides such an interface but is sophisticated and relies on the
use of special macro libraries (see Appendix C) to set up the API function calls.
With these thoughts in mind, let us briefly summarize the IBM Macro Assembler/2. We will not attempt to illustrate examples of the language; the early chapters
accomplish that. In this appendix we merely present the assembler constructs in
tabular form based on reference 3. Table A.1 presents the addressing modes for the
language. There are seven forms of addressing within the Macro Assembler. Table
A.2 contains brief descriptions for the basic instruction set common to the Intel 8086
TABLE A.1

MACRO ASSEMBLER ADDDRESING MODES

Mode

Comment

Immediate
Register
Direct
Register indirect

A byte or word constant in the source operand is loaded into a
register operand. Example: mov ax,18.
Register destination operands are loaded from register source operands. Example: mov ds,ax.
A register destination operand is loaded with the value of a location
specified by its offset added to DS. Example: mov ax,dddw, where
dddw is a variable in the data segment (addressed by DS).
The effective address (segment offset) is contained in BX, BP, SI,
or DI, and this is used to load a register. Example:
MDV bx' OFFSET dddw
MDvax1[bxJ

Base relative

Here the brackets indicate bx contains an address.
The effective address for the source is obtained by adding a displacement to BX or BP, which are assumed to contain an offset, Example:
MDV bP 10FFSET dddw
MDV ax 1[bp+l1J

Direct indexed

Here the effective source address is the sum of an index register
(SI or DI) and an offset. Example:
MDVSi1l1
MDV ax 1dddw [sil

Base indexed

This loads ax with the same value as loaded in the base relative
example.
Typically, the effective source address is the sum of a base register
(BX or BP), an index register (SI or DI), and a displacement.
Example:
MDV bx 10FFSET dddw
MDV Si ill
MDV ax 1[bxHsi+ZJ

Appendices

A IBM Macro
Assembler /2

In this appendix we present the IBM Macro Assembler/2, which can be used to
program the assembler under both DOS and OS/2 [1, 2]. In the early chapters all
programming was accomplished in assembly language. A major consideration,
however, is how desirable is this choice of language for the IBM microcomputer environment? The answer lies in how the programmer intends to use the assembly language. Basically, assembler is very programming intensive and serves best when
access of the system hardware is important. For the OS/2 Kernel service functions
this is particularly important when acquiring or writing to the display, the video
services (Vio), or the DOS functions (Dos) within the API. In addition to access of
the system hardware, another associated requirement should be mentioned: rapid
access of the hardware. The assembler is ideally suited for this requirement but has
the added stipulation that the programmer must be prepared to devote considerable
effort to writing very low-level code.
In this book an alternative language, the C programming language, is considered. C is more ideally suited for programming applications that require higher-level
functions to accomplish tasks. Typical examples of these functions are sine and
cosine, other hyperbolic and trigonometric functions, and a multitude of mathematical and statistical special-purpose functions. These can all be built up from assembly language programs by the user, but it is usually more desirable to access these
functions through a high-level language, using the assembler-constructed libraries
within the language. The general experience is, however, that the API calls are

270

Problems

269

5.12 Why are all lines appearing in Figures 5.19 through 5.23 not removed using the criteria that a negative direction to the facet normal constitutes a hidden line?
5.13 Show that the limit of Equation (5.13) is A 2 when (x, y) = (0, 0).
5.14 In the surface plotting program appearing in Figure 5.14, the disk read function,
xarray_diskrd0, is called prior to setting the CGA screen mode. Why?
5.15 In Figure 5.17 ,how would the function threeD_facets() change (aside from removal
of the define and include statement associated with OS/2) if this routine were to execute in a normal Real Mode program?

268

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

2. Nguyen, T., and Moska, R., Advanced Programmer's Guide to OS/2, Brady Communications Company, Inc., New York, 1989, p. 316.
3. LaBudde, K., Structured Programming Concepts, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York, 1987, p. 26.
4. Parnas, D., Information Distribution Aspects of Design Methodology, Carnegie-Mellon
University Technical Report, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 1971.
5. Fitzsimmons, A., and Love, T., A Review and Evaluation of Software Science, ACM
Computing Surveys, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 3-18, 1978.
6. Martin, J., and McClure, C., Structured Techniques for Computing, Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1985, p. 70.
7. Dijkstra, E., Structured Programming, Software Engineering 1969, NATO Scientific
Affairs Division, Brussels, Belgium, 1969.
8. Sedgewick, R.,Algorithms, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, MA, 1984.
9. Bentley, J., Programming Pearls, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, MA,
1986.
10. Folk, M. J. ,and Zoellick, B., File Structures, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company,
Reading, MA, 1987.
11. Petzold, C., Programming the OS/2 Presentation Manager, Microsoft Corporation,
Redmond, WA 1989.

PROBLEMS
5.1

If a routine is self-contained within a task and called very infrequently, what OS/2

technique could be used to conserve storage?
What sequence of steps differentiates a DLL from another executable module?
In Figure 5.2, what is the parameter on the stack at BP+2?
How does one differentiate a DLL module from another source code module?
Define the difference between IMPORTS and EXPORTS as appearing in the module
definition file.
5.6 What key API services are required for run-time DLL loading which are not required
for load-time linking? Structurally, why are these API services needed?
5.7 If you wished to achieve an understanding of the relationships between program
components, would you choose a Structure Chart or a flowchart? Explain.
5.8 What is the dominant characteristic of a C function? What are the implications of
this characteristic for program structure?
5.9 In C program code, when is it appropriate to use globally defined variables? Why
are these variables generally considered undesirable to program understanding?
5.10 Why is the include file "pmwin.h" not available as part of OS/2 Version 1.0?
5.11 In defining the three-dimensional surface, the grid of points is defined in the x-y
plane and facets established by connecting cyclically the projected points defined by
the surface itself. In plotting the resulting surface, the points are collapsed along the
x-axis. Why is this necessary?
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5

267

References

5.6 SUMMARY

This chapter has provided an examination of additional basic OS/2 features within
the core API and has reinforced programming techniques within the C language, the
primary language of choice for programming the Presentation Manager as well as
more complex activities under OS/2. We began with a look at mixed-language programming in the context of C and assembler. Next, dynamic linked libraries were
investigated from the viewpoint of assembly language, where they are more clearly
understood. The use of load-time DLLs is recommended when memory allocation is
to be optimized and a set of routines is to be called on a frequent basis. Load-time
dynamic linking has the advantage that the calling routine does not need to ascertain the location of the module at loading. Run-time dynamic linking is recommended for those applications where memory allocation is dynamic and at a premium and the routines to be accessed are done so infrequently. This technique
requires access through API service calls.
The C design process was examined from the viewpoint of top-down design,
structured programming, and modular code. Recommendations were provided regarding module size and implementation. A typical template for C design was presented
and the difficult issues of style and form touched upon. Style is such a crucial factor
in the development of maintainable code that it is very surprising how often it is
overlooked. Similarly, form can mean the difference between code that runs, and
code that purports to accomplish the job but is so cumbersome and slow that it fails
to achieve its objectives within a reasonable length of time.
All the API services return values that depend on the outcome of the call. The
question of whether or not a program should monitor those outcomes, once the
original debugging is complete, was left to the reader. Frequently, in the interest of
brevity, the full API return checking has been suppressed in this book unless a
hardware failure can result, such as the inability to access a disk.
A reexamination of the basic API core services was referenced: the Kbd, Mou,
Vio, and Dos services. These are the Version 1.0 services and have since been
added to by the presence of the PM functions, although these PM services are not
treated in this book. Finally, a C application was developed. This application consisted of the plotting of a three-dimensional surface in the CGA mode of the OS/2
command screen mode. The purpose of the presentation was to illustrate the manner in which moderately large-scale programs would be interfaced to OS/2 in the
normal operational environment, with a particular emphasis on the techniques outlined earlier in the chapter, such as modular code development.

REFERENCES
1. Godfrey, J. T., Applied C: The IBM Microcomputers, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood

Cliffs, NJ, 1990, p. 237.

266

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Surface plot with N = 7, a

= y = 0.0 and ~ = 1.2.

Figure 5.22 Surface plot with N = 7, a

y = 0.0 and ~ = 1.4.

Figure 5.21

Figure 5.23

Surface plot with N = 12, a

= y = 0.0 and ~

1.0.

Chap. 5

Sec. 5.5

Advanced C Example: A Three-Dimensional Surface

265

/* erase dot */

uwdot(col,row,MMl);
}
}

else
{

col = {int) (xl) i
if(yl > y2)
{

for(roW=(int) (y2)+l;row <= (int)(yl);row++)
uwdot(col,row,MMl);

/*erase dot*/

}

else
{

for(roW=(int){yl)+lirow <= (int) (y2)irow++)

/* erase dot */

uwdot(col,row,MMl);

Figure 5.18 (Co11cluded)

_.... ~.~. <:::::· .
..... --·- ·-. _
..
..
.:::· ....··
··.... ··.:·..
..--......···

·····...

/::...·::.... .....·

··...·-.

.

__

-

.. .--Figure 5.19 Surface plot with N = 7, a

y

0.0 and 13 = 0.8.

....-·l-·-·-.
_.-· .____ ·..

Figure 5.20 Surface plot with N = 7, a

y = 0.0 and 13

1.0.

264

Additional OS/2 Considerations

i f (Xl •• X2)

m•lOOO.;
else
m • (y2-yl)/(x2-xl):
if( X2 > Xl)

/* zero divide •/

/* normal slope •/

{

for(col • (int) (xl)+l:col <-(int) (x2):col++)
(

row •(int) (yl + m•(col - xl)):
wdot(col,row,MMl);

/* line equation •/
/* write dot */

}

else
{

if(x2 < xl)
{

for(col =(int) (x2)+1:col <= (int) (xl):col++)
{

row=(int)(y2 + m•(col - x2));
wdot(col,row,MMl);

/*write dot*/

}
}

else
{

col= (int}(xl};
if(yl > y2)

/* verticle line•/

{

for(row=(int)(y2)+1:row <=(int) (yl) :row++}
wdot(col,row,MMl);
}

else
{

for(row=(int}(yl)+l:row <= (int} (y2};row++)
wdot(col,row,MMl);

upltpt(xl,x2,yl,y2,MM1)
float xl,x2,yl,y2;
SEL MMl;
{

float m;
int row;
int col:

/* slope */

if(Xl == X2)

/* zero divide */

m = 1000.;

else

m = (y2-yl)/(x2-xl):
if(X2 > Xl)

/* normal slope */

{

for(col = (int)(xl):col <= (int)(x2) :col++)
{

row= (int)(yl + m•(col - xl));
uwdot(col,row,MMl);

/* line segment */
/* erase dot */

}

else
{

if {x2 < xl}
{

for(col = (int) (x2)+l:col <= (int)(xl):col++)
{

row=(int) (y2 + m•(col -x2)):

Figure 5.18 (Continued)

Chap. 5

Sec. 5.5

Advanced C Example: A Three-Dimensional Surface

/* Graph routines Protected Mode--gphrout.c */
#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
bboxx(xb,xe,yb,ye,MMl)
UINT xb,xe,yb,ye;

SEL MMl;
{

lineh(yb,xb,xe,MMl);
lineh(ye,xb,xe,MMl);
linev(xb,yb,ye,MM1);
linev(xe,yb,ye,MMl);

/* top line */
/* bottom line */
/* right line •/
/* left line */

)

lineh(y,xl,x2,MM1)
UINT y,xl,x2;

SEL MMl;
{

UINT·n;
for(n = xl;n <= x2;n++)

wdot(n,y,MMl);

/* hor line */

I

linev(x,yl,y2,MM1)
UINT x,yl,y2;

SEL MMl;
{

UINT n;
for(n = yl;n <= y2;n++)
wdot(x,n,MMl);

/* vertical line •/

I

wdot(x,y,MMl}
UINT x,y;

SEL MMl;

/* x=col,y=row •/

{

PCHAR ptr;
UINT OM = OxOOOO;
CHAR MASKl = OxOl;
i f (y & OxOl)
DM = Ox2000;

ptr = MAKEP(MMl,OM+(BO*(Y >> 1) + (x >> 2)));
•ptr =(*ptr I (MASKl « (2*(3 - x % 4))));
I
uwdot(x,y,MMl)

/* set dot */
/* even buffer */
/* dot location */
/* "OR" dot */

UINT x,y;

SEL MMl;
{

PCHAR ptr;
UINT OM = oxoooo;
CHAR MASKl = OxOO;

/* clear dot */

if(y & OxOl)
OM = Ox2000;
ptr = MAKEP(MM1,0M+(80*(Y >> l} + (x >> 2)));
*ptr = (MASKl << (2*(3 - x % 4)));

/* even buffer */
/* dot location */
/* write undot */

}

pltpt(xl,X2,yl,y2,MM1}
float xl,x2,yl,y2;

SEL MMl;
{

float m;

/* slope */

int row;
int col;

Figure 5.18 The file gphrout.c, containing the expanded line plot routines (and
the line unplot routines).

263

262

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

/* Function to plot JD facets: coordinates for CGA -- facetJd.c•/
#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
#include <stdio.h>
threeD_facets(ml,MMl)
int ml;
SEL MMl;

/* index */

(

extern int count;

extern float xarray[],x,y,z,scaley = 125.,scalez = 75.;
float zl,z2,yl,y2;
int n,nc;
float z_start

= 25.,y_start = 25.,z_mid = 75.,y_mid = 125.;

float dyl,dy2,dzl,dz2,xa[5],ya[5],za[5);
nc = 3•count;

xa[l)
ya[l)
za[l)
xa[2]
ya[2)
za[2)

xarray[ml);
xarray[ml+l);
xarray[ml+2);
xarray[ml+J);
xarray[ml+4);
xarray[ml+5);

xa[JJ
ya[J)
za(J)
xa[4J
ya[4)
za[4)

xarray[ml+nc+J];
xarray[ml+nc+4];
xarray(ml+nc+S];
xarray[ml+nc];
xarray[ml+nc+l];
xarray[ml+nc+2];

dyl
ya[2) dy2
ya[J) dzl
za[2) dz2
za[J) if((dyl*dz2 -

ya[l);
ya[2);
za[l);
za[2);
dzl•dy2) > O)

/* next y-value */
/* lst y-value grid */

/* 2nd y-value grid */

/* ck rotation */

{

for(n = l;n <= 4;n++)

/* scale facet */

{

za[n) = z_start + (z_mid - za[n]•scalez);
ya[n) = y_start + (y_mid + ya[n)•scaley);
)

for(n

l;n <= J;n++)

/* plot 3 of 4 */

{

yl
y2
zl

ya[n);
ya[n+l];
za[n);
Z2 = za[n+l);

pltpt(yl,y2,zl,z2,MM1);

/* collapsed y-z */

}

yl
y2
zl
z2

ya[4);
ya(l);
za[4);
za[l);
pltpt(yl,y2,zl,z2,MM1);

/* 4th segment */

}

Figure S.17 The file facet3d.c, used to generate the individual surface facets.

Sec. 5.5

Advanced C Example: A Three-Dimensional Surface

261

/* Function to scale xarray data */
#include <stdio.h>
scale()
extern int ncount,mcount;
extern float xarray[],scalex,scaley,scalez;
int n,m,ml;
float max_x = -l.el4,max_y = -l.e14,max_z = -l.el4;
float min_x = 1.e14,min_y = 1.e14,min_z = 1.el4;

ml = l;
for(n = l;n <= ncount;n++)
(

for(m = l;m <= mcount;m++)

/* max/min determine */

(

if(max_x < xarray[ml])
max_x = xarray[ml);
if(min_x > xarray[ml])
min_x = xarray[ml];
if(max__y < xarray[ml+l])
max__y = xarray[ml+l];
if(min_y > xarray(ml+l])
min__y = xarray[ml+l];
if(max_z < xarray[m1+2])
max_z = xarray[m1+2);
if(min_z > xarray[ml+2]);
min_z = xarray[ml+2];
/* next point set */

ml=ml+J;
)

/* scale [-1,l] */
scalex = 2./(max x - minx);
scaley = 2./(max:::Y - min=y);
scalez = 2./(max z - min z);
ml

= l;

-

-

for(n = l;n <= ncount;n++)
(

for(m = l;m <= mcount;m++)
(
/* normalize [1,-1) */
xarray[ml] = -1. + scalex*(xarray[ml] - min_x);
xarray[ml+l] = -1. + scaley*(xarray[ml+l] - min__y);
xarray[ml+2] = -1. + scalez*(xarray[ml+2] - min_z);
ml =ml + 3;
)

Figure 5.16 The file xscale.c, used for scaling the array between (-1,+1) along
all three axes.

tively, this tilts the viewing angle upward so that the observer is looking down at an
angle toward the image. Figures 5.20 through 5.22 maintain a and y at zero but
change~ to span 1.0, 1.2, and 1.4 radians, respectively. This progressively tilts the
image toward the reader, as illustrated. Figure 5.23 presents the figure for a= y =
0 and ~ = 1.0 with N = 12 instead of N = 7 [see Equation (5.13)].

260

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

VioGetPhysBuf((struct _VIOPHYSBUF far *)&PVBPrtl,vio_hdll);
MM - PVBPrtl.asel(O];

I* selector */

clrCGA (MM) ;

/* CGA clear •/

VioScrUnLock(vio_hdll);

/* unlock screen */

Figure 5.14 (Concluded)

/* Function to read xarray from disk */

#include <stdio.h>
xarray_ diskrd ()
(

extern float xarray(J;
int n,check,counter;

FILE •infile;
char FN2 (81];
printf("Input read database filename \n");
qets(FN2);
qets(FN2);
if((infile = fopen(FN2, "r")) == NULL)
{

printf ("Input file failure") ;
exit(l);
}

fscanf(infile, 11 %d \n",&counter);
for(n = l;n <= counter;n++)
fscanf(infile,"%f \n",&xarray[n));

if( (check = fclose(infile)) != O)
{

printf("Error on input file close");

exit(l);
}

return(counter) ;
}

Figure 5.15 The file xadiskr.c, for reading the disk file input to the surface
plotting program.

and if the facet is to be plotted, further scaling from [-1.,1.] to screen coordinates
is implemented. Here only the y-z plane is considered (the x-axis is collapsed).
Figure 5.18 contains the file gphrout.c used as a basis for the library
cgraph.lib. These routines are called to access the screen buffer. Figure 5.19 illustrates the output with a= y = 0 (no rotation about the x and z axes). In this figure
~= 0.8, which is a counterclockwise rotation of 0.8 radian about the y-axis. Effec-

Sec. 5.5

Advanced C Example: A Three-Dimensional Surface

clrCGA (MMM)
SEL MMM;
(

INT n;

INT Nl = Ox1F3F;
INT DM = Ox2000;
PCHAR ptr;

/* end odd buffer */
/* even offset */
/* pointer scr buf */

for(n = O;n <= N1;n++)
(

ptr = MAKEP(MMM,n);
*ptr = O;

/* odd far pointer */
/* clear odd buffer */

)

for(n = O;n <= Nl;n++)
(

ptr = MAKEP(MMM,DM+n);
*ptr = O;

/* even far pointer */
/* clear even buffer •/

)

/* Function to read xarray from disk */
#include <stdio.h>
xarray_diskrd()
(

extern float xarray[];
int n,check,counter;
FILE •infile;

char FN2 [81);
printf("Input read database filename \n 11 ) ;
gets(FN2);
gets(FN2);
if( (infile = fopen(FN2, "r")) == NULL)
{

printf("Input file failure");
exit(l);
)

fscanf(infile, 11 %d \n",&counter);
for(n = l;n <= counter;n++)
fscanf(infile, 11 %f \n 11 ,&xarray[n]);
if((check = fclose(infile)) != O)
{

printf("Error on input file close");
exit(l);
)

return(counter);
)

/* set STD mode */
VioSetMode(((struct _VIOMODEINFO far *)&STDm),vio_hdl);
DosExit(action,error_code);
)

cclsCGA(vio_hdll)
SHANDLE vio hdll;
(

-

SEL MM;
UINT waitl = l;
struct _VIOPHYSBUF PVBPrtl;
PVBPrt~.pBuf

= (BYTE far•) (OxBSOOO);

PVBPrtl.cb = Ox4000;
VioScrLock(waitl,(char far *)dstat,vio_hdll);

Figure 5.14 (Co11ti11ued)

/* physical buffer •/
/* phys buf start */
/* buffer length */
/* lock screen */
/* physical buffer */

259

258

Additional OS/2 Considerations

lkbd_buf.cb • 80;
/*

Chap. 5

/* buffer size */
setup Rotated Figure

*
*

•/
/* x-axis count *I

printf("Input ncount\n");
scanf("%d 11 ,&ncount);
Printf("\n Square array: ncount=mcount\n 11 ) ;
mcount=ncount;

/* y-xais count */
I* grid shift */
/* Input rotations *I
I* x-rotation */

count=ncount;

printf("Input x-rotation (rad)\n");
scanf("%f",&alphaO);

/* y-rotation *I

printf("Input y-rotation (rad)\n");
scanf("%f 11 ,&beta0);

printf("Input z-rotation (rad)\n");
scanf("%f",&qanunaO);

I* z-rotation *I

rot mat(alphaO,betaO,gammaO);
N =-xarray_diskrd();

I* loads global a[] *I
I* disk values */
/* 1st facet group *I

ml = 1;

for(n = l;n <= ncount;n++)
{

for(m = l;m <= mcount;m++)
{

x = xarray[ml];
y = xarray[ml+l];

/* x-input rotation */
/* y-input rotation */
/* z-input rotation */
/* rotate (x,y,z) */
/* reload x */
/* reload y */
/* reload z */
/* inc index J */

z = xarray[m1+2];
rot__point () ;
xarray[ml] = x;

xarray[ml+l]
y;
xarray[ml+2] = z;
ml

= ml + J;

)

I*
*

*

Graphics Screen Access

*I

scale();

/* x,y,z-> [1,-1] */

/* set CGA mode */
VioSetMode(((struct _VIOMODEINFO far *)&CGAm),vio_hdl);

/* clear CGA screen */

cclsCGA(vio_hdl);
VioscrLock(wait2,(char far *)dstatl,vio_hdl);

/*lock screen*/
/* physical buffer */
VioGetPhysBuf((struct _VIOPHYSBUF far *)&PVBPrt2,vio_hdl);
MMl = PVBPrt2.asel[O];

ml

/* selector */

= 1;

I* adjust llmit */

run count= J•ncount•mcount - (ncount•J + 6);
= l;n <= ncount;n++)

farcn
{

for(m = l;m <= mcount;m++)
{

if(ml < nm_count)
threeD_facets(ml,MMl);
ml = ml + J;

/* check facet count */
/* plot facets */
/* increment index */

)

prtscr(MMl);

/* PrtSc routine */

VioScrUnLock(vio_hdl);

/* unlock screen */

/* hesitate screen */

.KbdStringln({char far *)kbd_buf,
((struct STRINGINBUF far •)&lkbd_buf),
wait,kbd_hdl);

Figure S.14 (Continued)

Sec. 5.5

Advanced C Example: A Three-Dimensional Surface

/* This routine sets & clears CGA mode with screen clear--mmain3d.c
The generalized nomenclature is used.
A JD (sin(u)/u)**2 is plotted.
The routine calls gphrout.c graphics functions. •/

I* Conditional load *I
/* OS2 includes */

#define INCL BASE
#include <os2.h>
#include <stdio.h>

I* keyboard buf len *I

struct STRINGINBUF lkbd_buf;
CHAR kbd_buf[80];

/* keyboard buffer •/

UINT action = o;
UINT error code = O;

!• end thread */

UINT wait ;;; l;

I* reserved word */
I* lock status */

/* result code •/

CHAR dstat[l];
CHAR dstatl[l];

/* lock status •/

float xarray[3072],scalex,scaley,scalez,x,y,z,a[10]:

!• needed globals */

int ncount,mcount,count;

/*

•BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE
BYTE

I*

/* x-y count max */

--------------------------------------------------Print Screen Parameters

•;
/* raster line array •/

col1[320];
MM[4] = {Ox40,0xlO,Ox04,0x01};
W[8] = {128,64,32,16,8,4,2,l};
S(4];
shiftl[4] = {6,4,2,0};
in_bufferl[4]
{Ox1B,Ox4B,64,l};
in_buffer2[2] = {OxOD,OxOA};
in_buffer3[3] = {Ox1B,Ox41,8};
in_buffer4[2] = {OxlB,Ox32};
dev_name[5]

= ('L','P','T',

1

/* byte mask •/
/* gross weight */
/* dummy */
/* byte pos. shift •/
/* location byte */
I* c.r & l.f. •/

I* escape sequence */
I* line spacing */

1 ,0};
1

---------------------------------------------------- *I

main()
extern prtscr();

/* PrtScr routine */

SHANDLE vio hdl = O;
SHANDLE kbd-hdl = O;

/* video handle */

UINT wait2

=1,nnn;

UINT xb = 75,xe = 150,yb
SEL MMl;

175;

int n,m,ml,N,nm_count;
float alphaO,betao,gammao;

struct VIOPHYSBUF PVBPrt2;
struct -VIOMODEINFO CGAm;
struct =VIOMODEINFO STDm;
PVBPrt2.pBuf = (BYTE far*) (OxBSOOO);
PVBPrt2.cb = Ox4000;

CGAm.cb = 12;
CGAm.fbType = 7;

I* keyboard handle *I
I* box points */
/* selector */
I* plot variables */
I* direction cosines *I
I* physical buffer */
I* CGA structure */
I* 80 x 25 struct •/
I* buffer start */
/* reserved */

25,ye

/* buffer size */

CGAm.row = 25;
CGAm.hres = 320;
CGAm.vres = 200;

I* struct length */
I* CGA mode */
I* CGA color */
I* text columns */
I* text rows */
I* CGA hor res */
I* CGA vert res */

STDm.cb = 12;
STDm.fbType = l;

/* 80 x 25 mode */

CGAm.color = 2;

CGAm.col = 40;

STOm.color = 4;

STDm.col = 80;

STOm.row = 25;

STDm.hres

720;

STOm.vres = 400;

I* struct length */
I* STD color */
I* text columns */
/* text rows */
I* STD hor res */
I* STD vert res */

Figure 5.14 The program mmain3d.c, which is the main calling program for
plotting 2nd printing the three-dimensional surface.

257

256

Additional OS/2 Considerations

/* Function to write xarray to disk */

#include <stdio.h>
xarray_diskwt(NCOUNT)
int NCOUNT;

/* Number points */

(

int n,check;
FILE *outfile;

char FNl[Sl];
extern float xarray[);
printf("Input database filename\n");

gets(FNl);
gets(FNl);
i f ( ( outf ile = fopen ( FNl, "w") )

== NULL)

(

printf("Output file failure");

exit(l);
)

fprintf(outfile,"%d \n 11 ,NCOUNT);
for(n = l;n <= NCOUNT;n++)

fprintf(outfile, "%f \n" ,xarray[n]);
if((check = fclose(outfile)) != 0)
{

printf("Error on output file close");

exit(l);
)

Figure 5.12 The file xadiskw.c, which generates a Protected Mode disk write
using reentrant library routines.

mmain3d.obj: mmain3d.c
cl -c -zi mmainJd.c
facet3d.obj: facet3d.c
cl -c -zi facet3d.c
xscale.obj: xscale.c
cl -c -Zi xscale.c
rotmat.obj: rotmat.c
cl -c -Zi rotmat.c

rotpt.obj: rotpt.c
cl -c -zi rotpt.c
xadiskr.obj: xadiskr.c
cl -c -zi xadiskr.c
pprtscr.obj: pprtscr.c
cl -c -zi pprtscr.c
mmain3d.exe: mmainJd.obj xscale.obj facet3d.obj pprtscr.obj\

rotmat.obj rotpt.obj xadiskr.obj cgraph.lib
link /CO nunain3d+xscale+facet3d+rotmat+rotpt+pprtscr+\
xadiskr,,,cgraph,,

Figure 5.13 The MAKE file for the program that plots a three-dimensional
surface based on an input data file.

Chap. 5

Sec. 5.5

Advanced C Example: A Three-Dimensional Surface

255

/* generate Jd surface */
#include <math.h>
float xarray(2000),x(500],y(500],z[500);
main()
{

int n,m,ncount = 21,mcount = 21,ml,m2,N,NN;
float A= 10., error= 1.e-5;
double PI = 3.141592654,u,v;
printf("Input interval divider\n");
scanf( 11 %:d",&NN);

m2 = l;
ml = l;
for(n = l;n <= ncount;n++)
{

for(m = l;m <= mcount;m++)
{

x[m2) = (float){m - mcount + 10);
y(m2] = (float) (n - ncount + 10);
u = {double) (x[m2));
v = (double) (y(m2]);
u = (double) ((PI/NN)*sqrt{u*u + v•v));
if((u <error) && (u >-error))
z[m2] = A;
else

z(m2)

=

A*{sin(u)/u);

z(m2) = z[m2]*z[m2);
xarray(ml] = x(m2];
xarray(ml+l] = y(m2);
xarray(ml+2] = z(m2];
m2++;
ml =ml + 3;
}
}

N = ml-1;

xarray_diskwt(N);

Figure 5.11 The program gen3d.c, which generates the surface data file.

trates the disk write function. Figure 5.13 contains the MAKE file for the program
that plots the three-dimensional surface.
Figure 5.14 presents a main calling function for the program that plots the
three-dimensional surface input using xarray_ diskrdO, which is contained in Figure
5.15. The function threeD_graphO reads rotation angles for locating the observer and
rotates the input points. These functions, rotmatO and rotptO, have been mentioned
previously. Next, the data is scaled using scale(), which appears in Figure 5.16. The
function scale() simply ensures that all x, y, and z values lie within the interval
[-1.,1.].
After scaling the data, threeD_graph() clears the screen, sets CGA display
mode, and plots the facets using threeD_facet(). This function appears in Figure
5.17. The routine threeD_facet() first loads the arrays xa[], ya[], and za[] with each
of the four vertex points on the facet. A check for a hidden-line condition is made,

254

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

where the first row consists of Cartesian unit vectors. Since it is the x-axis term we
are interested in, we examine
(5.10)
Here
(5.11)
If

nx < 0

(5.12)

the facet contains hidden lines.
A Simple Mathematical Example
It is useful to create a simple example to illustrate a three-dimensional surface.
Consider the function

(5.13)
[(n IN),.,jx2 + y 2 ]2
This function has the familiar (sin x/x) 2 behavior. We note that in the limit (x, y)
= (0, 0) the result is

z =A 2

(5.14)

It is useful to generate values for x and yin the range [-10.,10.] with N = an input
value that is a measure of the range of z.
Figure 5.10 illustrates the MAKE file for a program gen3d.c, which creates

gen3d.obj: gen3d.c
cl -c -Zi gen3d.c
xadiskw.obj: xadiskw.c
cl -c -zi xadiskw.c

gen3d.exe: gen3d.obj xadiskw.obj
link gen3d.obj+xadiskw.obj,,,,

Figure 5.10 The MAKE file for the program
that writes the data file for a three-dimensional
(sin x /x) 2 surface.

this surface data file. Figure 5.11 illustrates a main calling program that generates
these values and writes them to disk. Initially, the total number of values (x, y, z) for
each point on an x-y grid spaced at unity intervals in the range above, is written to
disk followed by the points themselves in x, y, z order. This is an array and is
defined as specified above. It is the array xarray[] in Figure 5.11. Figure 5.12 illus-

Sec. 5.5

Advanced C Example: A Three-Dimensional Surface

253

Connecting these points cyclically yields the surface facet. When collapsed along the
x-axis we have the final points
1: (0, y"',f(x,,, Y.,))
2: (0, Ym+t' f(x,, • Ynr+t))
3: (0, Ynr+t' f(x,,+t' Yni+l))
4: (O,y.,,f(xn+1•Y.,))

If these points are plotted with the y-axis corresponding to column values and
the z-axis corresponding to row values, a surface representation will be displayed
with facets outlined.
It is important to recognize that the surface described above will display all
lines appearing in the facets. This includes "hidden lines," which are those lines
appearing in facets whose view would normally be obstructed. This obstruction results from the fact that other facets are located in front of the facet in question when
viewed in the chosen direction.
To avoid illustrating hidden lines, it is useful to delete plotting of facets containing these lines. Although there are several ways to eliminate these hidden line
facets, a very simple procedure is to create a vector normal to the facet and ignore
the facet if this vector has a negative component pointing into the screen. Since the
x-axis is normal to the screen, this implies that a negative, x-component of this
normal vector would denote a facet with hidden lines.
We can create this normal vector from any three points in the surface. Suppose
that we have the vertices defined by vectors from the origin:

P1 = (xi' Y1• z1)
P2 = (x2, Y2• z2)
P3 = (x3, Y3• z3)

(5.6)

and cyclically define line segments

m1 = (P1 - P3)
m2 = (P2- P1)

(5.7)

m3 = (p3- P2)
Then a normal to the surface subtended by these three line segments is given by
n = m; x mi+i

(i = 1, 2, 3)

(5.8)

In this equation i is cyclic (modulo 3). The vector product is defined by the determinant
-0
/.'.
I
J

'k'

n

= m.

IX

m<i+l)x

m.ty

m.IZ

m<i+llY

m<i+l)z

(5.9)

Additional OS/2 Considerations

252

Chap. 5

Here the sets {xn} and {yn,} have been chosen to span the space of interest. The
three-dimensional surface is then determined relative to this grid using Equation
(5.3). We assume further that an observer is located at the point (x , y , z) which is
•
A
P. p PN
achieved by a rotation
(a, ...,,
y) about the x, y, an d z axes, respectively.
( ote that
this rotation is not composed of orthogonal components.) This rotation was treated
in some detail in Chapter 4 and the reader is referred to the routine rotmatO and
rotptQ for a complete discussion.
With this formulation, then, we can generate an abstract three-dimensional
space with the observer located at any point in the space. Following the rotation a
new set of coordinates is defined by
n

x'

(

y'

)

f~~ 1n•Y'm)

=

(5.5)

R(a, f3, y) is given by Table 4.1. To display this space it will be useful to collapse
the x-axis once a suitable rotation has been achieved. The points plotted on this
display will then be members of the set

{(O, y'n? f(x'n• y'm)): n=l,2, ... ,N; m=l,2, ...,M}
The order for the display will be to let {y'",} correspond to column positions and
{f(x'n, y'm)} correspond to row positions.
One final concept is needed: the notion of a facet. Basically, for plotting
purposes it is useful to break the surface into facets (or small localized areas). The
methodology for achieving this (used here) is to consider a grid structure on the x-y
plane and assume a facet to be bounded by each set of grid lines projected onto the
surface. For example, if we consider a surface grid, it is clear that the four x-y plane
grid points

1: (x,,,ym, 0)

2: (x,,,ym, 0)
3: (xn+I' Ym+I' 0)
4:

(x11+J:' Ym• 0)

define the locations of the vertices of the grid. Lines connecting 1 and 2, 2 and 3,
3 and 4, and 4 and 1, respectively, define the grid. Projecting these lines onto the
surface yields the surface points
1: (x,,. y 111 ,f(x,,,y"'))
2: (x,,, Ym+I'f(x,,, Ym+I))
3: (x,,+I' Ym+I' f(xn+J:' Ym+l))
4: (x,,+J:' Ym,f(x,,+1•Ym))

Sec. 5.5

251

Advanced C Example: A Three-Dimensional Surface

5.4 REEXAMINING THE CORE VERSUS PRESENTATION
MANAGER API SERVICES
The core or basic API services are largely derivative from the OS/2 Version 1.0,
where only keyboard (Kbd), mouse (Mou), video (Vio), and DOS (Dos) calls are
available. These are the only services treated in this book. For those readers familiar with Microsoft's Windows environment, the PM presents a similar graphics-like
interface. It is programmed in a fashion similar, but not identical, to Windows. Programming the PM requires a great deal of concentration and patience. This effort
will be simplified greatly when additional object-oriented tools are developed.
Petzold [11] has written a lengthy book on how to accomplish this Presentation
Manager programming. The reader is cautioned that some differences exist between
the PM described in Petzold's book, which is based on the Microsoft version, and
the IBM version of the Presentation Manager, which was released after the Microsoft version. When accessing the graphical interface, for example, in the full command screen mode the Vio calls must be used. Under PM the Gpi function calls are
used.

5.5 ADVANCED C EXAMPLE: A THREE-DIMENSIONAL SURFACE
In this section we present an analytical approach for describing three-dimensional
surfaces within the framework of simple vector arithmetic. A technique for removing "hidden lines" is illustrated based on consideration of the rotating characteristics
of facets. Here a facet is a member of a logical subdivision of the three-dimensional
surface. We begin with a brief discussion of surface characterization.
Functions of Two Variables

It is convenient to denote a function of one variable using the notation
y = f(x)

(5.2)

Graphically, such a relationship is represented with a two-dimensional plot using the
independent variable, x, along the horizontal axis and the dependent variable, y,
along the vertical axis. When a function depends on two variables it is representable
in a three-dimensional space defined by
z

= f(x, y)

(5.3)

In displaying such data a third axis must somehow be represented on a two-dimensional surface, the display screen. We have seen that it is useful to assume three
perpendicular (orthogonal) axes: an x-axis, a y-axis, and a z-axis. Points in this space
are denoted by

(x, y, z) = (x, y, f(x, y))

(5.4)

The geometry for a three-dimensional surface consists of a grid of x-y points.
{(x,,, y111 , O)}: n = 1, 2, .. ., N; m = 1, 2, ... , M }

Additional OS/2 Considerations

250
TABLE 5.3

Chap. 5

(Concluded)

Type

Comments

Hashing

Heaps

Linked lists
Priority queues

Sparse arrays

accessible either sequentially, randomly, or
directly via indexes or keys.
This is a structure technique in which an algorithm
or function is used to generate an address of a
data element from a key. Typical associated structures would be a hash list.
Heaps are most easily described as binary tree
structures possessing order and shape. Order, for
example, might specify that the value at any node
is less than or equal to the value at the children.
Shape suggests the tree architecture.
These data structures are used as indexes to other
structures and have an associated pointer index
that points to a relative record in the primary list.
This is a set of elements arranged according to
priority. When an element is added or deleted, we
do so in accordance with assigned priority or
associated rules.
These are data structures with many zero elements.
They can be reduced significantly to smaller
storage by using additional indexing arrays with
an appropriate indexing algorithm.

5.3.3 API Return Values and Error Checking
When an API routine is called, it contains a return value in the AX register which
is passed back to the calling routine. In general, if this AX or return value is zero,
the call has been successful. If not, one of several possible error conditions may
exist, depending on the value returned. The user has an option as to how to treat
these calls.
As an example of a typical API error return processing, consider
error = DosGetPID (process
if (errorl=O)

IDs ) ;

{

printf ("Error on acquiring process
exit(l);

ID");

}

The reader should feel free to insert his or her own error processing as appropriate
following API service calls.

Sec. 5.3

249

Optimizing the C Design Process

ized algorithms for handling large data organizations that require speed of access of
optimized storage. Similarly, sparse array techniques minimize the amount of storage needed for multidimensional data.

TABLE 5.2

SOME TYPICAL ALGORITHMS

Type

Comments

Mathematical

Arithmetic, random numbers, interpolation, simultaneous equations, integration
Exchange, bubble, quicksort, radix, priority queues,
selection/merging
Sequential, binary, tree, hashing
Pattern matching, parsing, file compression
Polygons, line intersection, convex surfaces, grids,
closest point
Connectivity, mazes, shortest path, topological sorting,
networks
Systolic arrays, FFT, dynamic programming, linear
programming

Sorting
Searching
String processing
Geometric
Graph
Advanced

All these techniques are used in developing the area of data structures and database
design. The interested reader is referred to reference 9 for specific details of largescale implementations. In this book we will confine most of the discussion to the
primitive structures listed in the beginning of Table 5.3.

TABLE 5.3
Type

Arrays
Bit strings
Bit maps

Databases

SOME REPRESENTATIVE DATA STRUCTURES
Comments

These structures consist of concatenated variables
stored in a block and accessible via one or more
indexes.
These structures constitute the basic building blocks
of any language and are accessible in C by using
the bitwise operators.
This is a mapping of a set of variables and their
associated parameters onto a set of bits, which
constitutes a smaller set of storage. All attributes
of the variables are not represented in this fashion,
and the mapping must be attribute specific.
Databases are complex data structure.s consisting of
data items or fields collected into records that are

248

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

increment++;
}
}

Now consider the alternative
for

(n=l;n<=N;n++)

{

v[n]=v[n]*v[n]
for (m=l;m<=M;m++)
{

if( (v[n]>q[m])
increment++;

&

(v[n]<q[m+l]))

}
}
}

The second form is admittedly more cumbersome, although easier to understand.
What about time criticality? In the first fragment the expression
v[n]

= v[n] *v[n]

is executed NM times, while in the second fragment it executes only N times. The
latter program fragment ensures an optimum time-critical compiled result. Although
this example may appear academic, it is representative of the decisions regarding
form that must be made.
Algorithm development The topic of this section is algorithms. Algorithms are
structured approaches to solving mathematically, particular problems amenable to
solutions. A more general definition would, of course, encompass most programming
efforts. We have iterative and recursive programming and it is true that a fundamental technique in designing efficient solutions is the recursive method, because this
approach builds on an earlier solution. Table 5.2 illustrates some typical algorithms
as discussed by Sedgewick [8]. We have already seen examples of some of these
algorithm techniques. In general, we will not address the complete class of problems
covered by the table; the interested reader is referred to reference 8 for a complete
discussion. It is important, however, to recognize that algorithms are what computer
programs are all about. Problems amenable to algorithmic solution can easily be
tailored to computers.
Data Structures We briefly consider the subject of data structures [9] (as opposed
to file structures [10]). Table 5.3 illustrates some well-known data structures used in
small- and large-scale program development. We have already seen arrays used as
a basic element of the C language. Using the bitwise operators, it is possible to enter or extract information from data elements at the bit level. More complex data
structures, such as hashed lists, heaps, linked lists, and priority queues, are special-

247

Optimizing the C Design Process

Sec. 5.3

As part of style we need to consider templates. This topic is meant to cover
the overall program structure. A general template is as follows:
Module 1 (main())
Documentation (comment describing module)
Preprocessor (include files, define directions,
main() (function definition)

globals)

Module 2 (functionl(),. ..functionN())
Documentation
functionl()

(comment describing functions)

functionN ( )

Module 3 (function(N+l)(),. ..functionM())
Documentation (comment describing
function(N+l)()

functions)

functionM()

Module L (functionQ(),. ..functionR())
Documentation (comment describing functions)
functionQ ( )
functionR ( )

Here
l<N<N+l< ••• <M< ••• <Q< ••• <R

and
2<3< ••• <L

Finally, we consider form. Good form consists of defining the optimum methodology for implementing an algorithm. Unfortunately, most algorithms are sufficiently complex that it is difficult to decide what the best way to implement the algorithm might be. The issue of form must be addressed in a somewhat simplistic
fashion. Consider the following code fragment:
for

(n=l;n<=N;n++)

{

for (m=l;m<=M;m++)
{

v[n]=v(n]*v[n]:
i f ( (v[n]>q[m]) &

(v(n]<q[m+l]))

Additional OS/2 Considerations

246

Chap. 5

5.3.2 Templates, Style, and Form

Style is a somewhat elusive feature of programming which reflects individual
thought patterns as much as any organized approach to program development.
Consider, for example, the problem of variable definition, mentioned earlier. The
following is easily understood:
mortgage_int

=

loan__principal

*

interest_rate.

What about the following?
I

Instantaneous_amp = exp(-time/delay_factor)*
cos ( 2. * pi * frequency * time)

For technically inclined users, the following is much easier:
A = exp(-t/tau)

*

cos(2.

*

pi

*

f

*

t)

(Those who are not technically trained probably will not care about such details.)
Programmers with a background in FORTRAN, ALGOL, or original BASIC
are familiar with restrictions on the length of a variable name. They tend to be more
cryptic than programmers of more recent vintage, who are used to 32-character
limits. This is decidedly a learned style feature. More important is the need to clarify variable meaning. If the programmer provides a design document, which is
essential for a clear understanding of the program, each variable should be delineated in an unambiguous fashion. In cumbersome assignments, spelling out each
variable name in a wordy fashion can often obscure the meaning of the underlying
relationship. Similarly, by being too cryptic or obscure, the meaning of the equality
can escape the reader.
An additional feature of style is the nature of actual code reduction. In other
words, is the code compact, or can each relationship be followed in easily readable
form? The code

I

if(((xl==cl)
Al:

(x2==+c2))

&

((x3==c3)

I

(x4==c4)))

is compact, the following is slightly easier to follow:
if((xl==cl)

I

(x2==c2))

{

if((x3==c3)

I

(x4==c4))

{

Al:
}

}

(If the reader has doubts as to which is easier, try assigning values and working out
the truth table.)

Sec. 5.3

Optimizing the C Design Process

245

structures the use of exception handling must be clarified. Consider the if... statement in the following form:
if(check==O)
{

printf ("Denominator zero");
exit(l);
}

Here the if statement specifically looks for an error condition and prints the message
explaining this condition prior to exit. The exception handling is part of the if
purpose. A sequence of the form
for

(n=l;

n<=N;

n++)

{

x=x+a;
if (x==NTOTAL)
{

printf ( "x max exceeded");
exit(l);
}

a=a+b;
}

is less desirable because the causative factors (a, b, and x too large) are unclear at
time of the exit. In general, we use the unconditional exit only [exit (1)] and we
only use this exit when the complete nature of the error condition is absolutely clear.
Also, it is used subject to the constraints indicated above. A typical use is
if

( (check=fopen

(FNl, "r") )==NULL)

{

printf ("Error on read file open");
exit( l);
}

To some extent this discussion is semantic. Exits from within loops should not
occur. Since C does not allow branching or jumps (as in assembler, FORTRAN, and
other languages), there is really no way to exit a loop except with an exception
handler or a goto. We have virtually ruled out goto statements, so only exception
handling remains. The latter exit should be avoided within a loop structure. Flag the
condition and upon exit from the loop report all relevant parameter data prior to
exit. The latter exit should be accomplished using a conditional structure that specifically tests the exception status.

244

Additional OS/2 Considerations

Chap. 5

This artifact illustrates what functional activities are subordinate to other activities.
At a glance, the user can glean overall functional program relationships from the
program Structure Chart. This entity should be developed as the first component of
program design. Next, the execution flow must be developed. The functional flowchart serves as a convenient vehicle for accomplishing this.
Briefly, there are a number of types of flowcharts. They vary from more
functionally oriented descriptions of program behavior, in which generalized activity is interconnected, to very detailed descriptions where each line of code literally
occupies a place in the overall flowchart. In this book we favor the functional
approach because it is a good compromise: It gives the user a sense of the program
execution and does not require pages of description.
As an alternative to the flowchart, pseudo-code can be used. Pseudo-code has
the advantage that it is very close to the actual program mechanics and has the
structure of natural language. With pseudo-code the uninitiated can develop a feeling for program execution while not fully comprehending the language syntax in
which the program is written. A number of authors of high-level languages are developing program design languages (PDLs) which are essentially pseudo-code. The
POL approach to program design is particularly appropriate for very large-scale
program development that may require significant development time. In this case a
need exists to have an easily understood design document that can be made available to new programming team members. For most microcomputer applications,
however, the flowchart is quite suitable.
Actual module implementation within the confines of structured code employs
sequential and control statements as discussed above. The module should have one
entry and one exit path (with exception control handled so as to delineate the error
condition). Finally, each module should be documented to explain its function and
what data structures exist, where needed. The relationship of one module to another
can be delineated in special cases where it is not explained in an associated flowchart or Structure Chart.
The purpose of this short discussion is to reemphasize the importance of structured programming in the C language by briefly illustrating several features of the
language. Also, we discuss some philosophical implications for structured code.We
begin with the one entry and one exit precept applied to module definition. This
control mechanism can be extended backward to the architectural structures mentioned earlier. Next we discuss the implications of style and form. (Also, a brief
look at templates is treated as part of style.) Finally, a general look at algorithm development is used to round out the discussion. Also, data structures are treated.
The control and loop structures used in the C language are designed to provide
one entry and one exit to modules. This ensures that control flow is linear through
the structure (if, if... else, ... , while, do ... while, etc.). Also, exit conditions are clearly
made available to the user during execution. With regard to iterative structures such
as loops, it is clear that multiple exits can be disastrous because the user may never
learn about the state of the system that causes the exit condition. To jump outside
a loop that is undergoing normal execution is highly undesirable. With conditional

Sec. 5.3

Optimizing the C Design Process

243

An example of point 9 would be where very simple "bookkeeping" is involved in
a module for clarity and maintenance purposes. Also, the use of globals does not appreciably increase the level of difficulty of a small program but can significantly
reduce the size of variable handling code (particularly when pointers are used as an
alternative).
The major difficulty with software development is not in determining how to
make the computer function to execute a program but rather, in ensuring that a
given program actually generates the output it was intended to generate. The emphasis here is on software integrity, with the presumption made that the programmer
will learn the mechanics of programming within a particular language. To simplify
program design and development, structured programming techniques evolved.
Dijkstra [7] defined the initial concept, and structured programming is now a wellestablished discipline which has greatly affected the C architecture. The notion of
structured programming in the broadest sense encompasses top-down design and
modular programming. At a more localized level, structured programming focuses on
coding techniques intended to simplify program understanding and facilitate program
use (such as program modification and maintenance). In the following discussion we
focus on the latter area: structured code.
The most desirable structure concept is sequentially defined code. In this
instance instructions are executed as they are encountered. C provides for two
deviations from this approach: conditional execution and iterative loops. We have
seen examples of both of these conditions. Conditional execution included use of the
forms

1. if.. .
2. if... else
3. the conditional operator
4. switch ... case ...break
Similarly, iterative loops utilize the forms

1. while ...
2. do ...while
3. for .. .
These two groups of statements are the most important control mechanisms in the
C language. They form the basis of C structured coding techniques. Although C
allows the goto ... statement, it is discouraged and appropriate only in very extenuating circumstances. It should be argued forcefully that any code segment using a
goto can be rewritten to avoid this statement. The major difficulty with goto statements, as pointed out by Dijkstra, is that unrestrained branching within a module
can take place. This can lead to difficulty in understanding the intent of the code.
Structured code begins with a hierarchical description in the Structure Chart.

Answers To Problems

322

pendent thread has a particular piece of code that must execute prior to any other
operation for the parent process. Then it would be desirable to monitor and ensure
that this code executed, before continuing. Clearly, this could be dynamic and change
with the active chronology of execution.
2.17. DosExit is used to terminate an application and return to OS/2. All other returns
NEAR or F.

Chapter 3
3.1. The drivers mentioned operate from the kernel, level 0. They must originate here
because they have to be protected ahead of all other code. We cannot have a diskwrite preempted in the middle, nor can we tolerate "jerky" mouse cursor movement
as the mouse position changes.
3.2. The macro calls admittedly remove a layer of detail from the program code. This
layer would tend to expand the code by a factor of 4 to 7. All the pushes to the
stack have been suppressed prior to each API call and the call takes on the form of
a higher-level-language (HLL) function call. The data area tends to expand considerably with all the macro parameter definitions, but the actual executable code remains compact. This requires the programmer to develop a general familiarity with
the macro calls at the level of the IBM Programmer's Toolkit or Appendix C of this
book. Once this familiarity bas developed it is a very easy matter to read the resulting "structured" code and follow the flow of execution. Hence maintenance becomes
an easy task. Clarity (of how the code executes) is also paramount, and much more
so under the macro call format. The macro calls do, however, inhibit debugging in
that the in-line code is missing. If the user prints a copy of the list file with macros
expanded, tracing the source code is still an easy matter. In general, these approaches
tend to be a matter of preference based on the programmer's orientation. We favor
the HLL appearance of the code. It makes functional performance of the code the
primary mechanism to be emphasized. Expansion of the in-line code makes it more
obscure from a functional viewpoint but easier (and essential) to debug.
3.3. For the segment to be sharable, bit 0, to be sharable through @DosGiveSeg, or bit 1,
to be sharable through @DosGetSeg, must be set in the flags word (the third parameter in the calling list). Bit 2 of this same flags word must be set if the segment
is to be discardable.
3.4. The write to the huge segment must use the proper selector. When crossing the 64Kbyte boundary the program must access a new but contiguous selector.

3.5. There must be some common link between the two processes. Usually, this is a
common element name such as
\SEM\SDA'l'.DA'l'

or
\QUEUES\QDA'l'.DA'l'

which appears in both processes and is the same. The system then provides the connection. Alternative to this is the passing of a selector or printer in a common

321

Answers To Problems
2.7 . ...
80
$-kbd_buf
0
0
1000
5000

kbd_buf
lkbd_buf
iowait
kbdhdl
freq
dur

db
dw
dw
equ
dw
dw

@KbdStringin
@Dos Beep

kbd_buf,lkbd_buf,iowait,kbdhdl
freq,dur

2.8. Yes, all calls to the API can be made in full form, where each push and pop, as
well as EXTRN declaration, is stated explicitly according to the rules of OS/2. The
toolkit simply provided a set of assembler .inc files and C .h files that facilitated
usage of the API services through very functional macros.
2.9. The key assumption is that segment selectors can be treated as segment addresses.
Since the 80286 accesses segments using the selectors, the selector value must reside
in a segment register. The address is then calculated in the usual Protected Mode
fashion, where the segment selector acts as a segment address. The use of segment
override addressing, such as
es: [bp]

simply permits specification of an address in the usual fashion, where the segment
selector is made to correspond to the physical segment address when VioGetPhysBuf
is exercised.
2.10. They represent FAR locations because the entry points are called from external API
modules, hence a 32-bit address must be specified.
2.11. No hierarchy should have a single child subordinate to a parent. The box 310 should
be absorbed in 300.
2.12. The command is
@Doswrite dev_hand,in_buffer5,bytesin3,bytesout

where the undefined parameter is
in_buffer5 db 1BH,41H,OCH

2.13. It is intuitive that they cannot be preempted by an OS/2 task switch, or the possibility of losing data from the device would occur.
2.14. To access the screen buffer (physical) properly, the screen must be locked; hence if
scr_ld is to load scr_buffer with the screen context, it must be locked. If prtscr is
executed when the screen is locked, it could dominate access time for the physical
display buffer. Hence the program should load a temporary buffer, release the screen
context, and then begin the print operation.
2.15. Ten complete raster segments.
2.16. The DosExitCritSec corresponds to exit of a critical section of execution for a thread
and returns control to a process. This could be used, for example, when an inde-

Answers To Problems

320
2.2. @VioGetPhysBuf

macro
@define
@pushs
@pushw
call
endm

dstruc,rsrvd
VIOGETPHYSBUF
dstruc
rsrvd
far ptr VIOGETPHYSBUF

2.3. @VioScrLock

macro

wait,status,handle
VIOSCRLOCK
wait
status
handle
far ptr VIOSCRLOCK

@define
@pushw
@pushw
@pushw
call
endm

2.4. The VioGetPhysBuf structure, PVBPtrl, needs to be specified as
PVBPtrl
bufstl
buflenl
phys ell

label
dd
dd
dw

FAR
OAOOOOH
6D60H
0

dw
dw

5000
1000

2.5••••
freq
dur

freq,dur

@Dos Beep

2.6••••
waitf
dstat
viohdl
PVBPtrl
bufstl
buflenl
physell

equl
db ?
equ 0
label
dd
dd
dw

@VioScrLock
@VioGetPhysBuf
push physell
pop es
mov dh,25
mov, dl, 154
mov bx, 75
mov cx,235
call connl2
@VioScrUnLock

waitf,dstatk,viohdl
PVBPtrl,viohdl

viohdl

FAR
0B8000H
4000H
0

Answers To Problems

319

1.10. This occurs as a result of IBM's reservation of the last 384 KB of address space for
special-purpose system memory, much of which is either screen buffer memory or
ROM (read-only memory). OS/2 extended memory resides from 1 MB to 16 MB (in
the physical address space).
1.11. Physical memory occupies the actual hardware locations accessed by the 24 pins
from the address lines of the 80286 CPU chip. This can be a maximum of 16 MB
(224). Virtual memory is memory allocated in an abstract sense by the system. Since
there are 16,384 (214) possible selectors with 65,536 locations per selector, there are
a maximum total of 1,073,741,824 possible locations that can be addressed uniquely
in this virtual space. OS/2 manages this space by mapping each segment selector to
a segment base address through manipulation of the translation registers. Hence, if
the available physical memory is less than 16 MB, for example, and the required
program and data memory exceed 16 MB or the actual physical memory, OS/2 will
move code and data to and from disk as needed.
1.12. The Table Indicator (TI) bit in the segment selector is set for references to system
memory. It is zero for references to local application program memory. There are
536,870,912 locations accessible by applications in virtual memory.
1.13. If the data communications service resided at level 0, it could preempt the CPU during long sessions which would mask out other, potentially more important interrupts.
This could lead to catastrophic failure.
1.14. The boot record loads the Machine Status Word register with a MSW that has bit
zero set for Protected Mode operation. Subsequent loads of this register using the
LMSW instruction can modify this state.
1.15. 1. Initialization Routine-Assembler
2. Strategy Routine-C
3. Interrupt Service Routine-Assembler
1.16. A pipe references a bulk memory area, whereas a queue allows access to individual
members of the queue.
1.17. The API framework is more cumbersome for assembly language programs where
software interrupts (using INT) provide immediate low-level access to the system
hardware, for example. On the other hand, the API call orientation allows a rather
elegant description of the services, which can enhance understanding and readability.
In the C environment the API services are an asset, providing very readable functionlike access to system services.
1.18. In both cases the threads must synchronize their access.
1.19. DosSleep. Unlike a process, the thread cannot terminate itself. Threads can be terminated only when the thread's parent process is terminated.
1.20. No, the Gpi services can be used only with the PM.
1.21. Modaless because the screen context is not preempted.

Chapter 2
2.1. (a) pins 8, 6, 4, 3, and 2
(b) pins 8, 7, 4, 2, and 1
(c) pins 7, 5, 3, and 1

Answers To Problems

318
extrn
endif
endm

1.5. @VioScrUnLock

callname:far

macro

handle

@define
@pushw
call
end um

VIOSCRUNLOCK
handle
far ptr VIOSCRUNLOCK

macro
mov
push
endm

pa rm
ax,parm
ax

@define

macro
ifndef
extrn
end i f
endm

callname
callname
callname:far

1.6. @VioScrLock

macro
@define
@pushw
@pushs
@pushw
call
endm

wait,status,handle
VIOSCRLOCK
wait
status
handle
far ptr VIOSCRLOCK

where
@pushw

and

where @define and @pushw are defined as in the answers to Problems 1.4 and 1.5
and
@pushs

macro
mov
push
lea
push
endm

pa rm
ax,SEG parm
ax
ax,parm
ax

1.7. 1. A multitasking environment
2. A memory management facility
3. The PM user-friendly interface
1.8. Since we are talking about applications code, the non-system-oriented instruction set
is applicable, and this is generally common to both CPUs with few exceptions. The
major drawback to 80386 code is the use of references to the extended register set
(32-bit registers): EAX, EBX, ECX, .... While the 80286 general-purpose registers
(AX, BX, CX, ...) are a subset of these extended registers, the converse is not true.

1.9. 2

Answers to Problems

Chapter 1
1.1. 81CA H

1.2. No, while OS/2 employs time slicing to share access to a single CPU among multiple separate tasks or threads, it is not designed to service more than one CPU.
Hence OS/2 does not provide for the parallel operation of multiple CPUs.
1.3. 4, 294, 967, 295 (232 -1); +2, 147, 483, 647 (231 -1)
1.4. @DosExit

macro
@define
@pushw
@pushw
call
endm

action,result
DOSEXIT
action
result
far ptr DOSEXIT

macro
mov
push
endm

pa rm
ax,parm
ax

macro
ifndef

callname
callname

where
@pushw

and
@define

317

App.E

316
TABLE E.2

Keyboard and Mouse Kernel Functions

(Concluded)

Service

MouGetDevStatus
MouReadEventQue
MouGetNumQueEl
MouFlushQue
MouRemovePtr
MouFlushQue
MouRemovePtr
MouDrawPtr
MouGetPtrShape/
MouSetPtrShape
MouGetPtrPos/
MouSetPtrPos
MouRegister
MouDeRegister
MouSynch

Description

Getting the state of the pointer and the event
queue
Reading a data record from the event queue
Determining the number of records in the queue
Clearing the queue
Defining a restricted screen area where the
pointer is not allowed to appear
Clearing the queue
Defining a restricted screen area where the
pointer is not allowed to appear
Redefining a restricted screen area, where the
pointer is allowed to appear
Getting or setting the shape of the pointer
Getting or setting the vertical and horizontal
positions of the pointer
Registering another mouse subsystem for the
current session
Canceling the registration of a mouse subsystem
Synchronizing access for a mouse subsystem
with the mouse device driver

REFERENCE
1. IBM Operating System/2 Programmer's Toolkit, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1987.

App.E

315

Keyboard and Mouse Kernel Functions

TABLE E.1

(Concluded)

Service

Description

KbdFlush
KbdOpen/kbdClose
KbdGetFocus/
KbdFreeFocus
KbdGetStatus/
KbdSetStatus
KbdGetCP/
KbdSetCP
KbdSetCustXt
KbdRegister
KbdI>eRegister
KbdSynch

Clears the keyboard input buffer of all queued
keystrokes
Opening and closing a handle to a secondary logical
keyboard
Getting and releasing the input focus by the secondary keyboard
Getting and setting the keyboard state
Getting and setting the II> of the system code page
used to translate scan codes into ASCII codes
Installing a customized keyboard translation table
Registering a keyboard subsystem for the current
session
Canceling the registration of a keyboard subsystem
Synchronizing the subsystem's access to the physical
keyboard

E.3 THE MOUSE SERVICES
Table E.2 indicates the mouse API services. Again, these services are available
through the macros and functions defined in the IBM Toolkit.
TABLE E.2

THE MOUSE FUNCTION CALLS

Service

Mou Open
Mou Close

MouGetNumButtons
MouGetEventMask/
MouSetEventMask
MouSetDevStatus

MouGetNumMickeys
MouGetScaleFact/
MouSetScaleFact

Description

Initializes the mouse event queue and obtains a
handle to access it
Closes the mouse device for the current session
and removes the mouse device driver handle
from the list of valid open mouse device
handles
Determining the number of buttons supported
Getting or setting the types of events reported by
data records
Setting mouse data to be returned in mickeys
instead of coordinates (a mickey is a unit of
measurement for physical mouse motion,
whose value depends on the mouse device
driver currently loaded)
Determining the number of mouse motion units
per centimeter
Getting or setting the mickey-to-pet ratio for
mouse motion

App.E

314

Level 3:

Keyboard and Mouse Kernel Functions

BSE.H
This file allows the user to set up defined symbols such as all
the OS/2 API kernel functions, including those that begin with
Dos, kbd, Vio, and Mou. It includes loading of BSEDOS.H,
BSESUB.H, and BSEERR.H.
OS/2
BSEDOS.H
This file sets up constants, structures, and function prototypes for
the Dos services.
BSESUB.H
This file sets up constants, structures, and function prototypes for
the Vio, kbd, and Mou services.
BSEERR.H
This file sets up error code constants for the OS/2 kernel API
services.

The remaining .h files are Presentation Manager files and are only available under
the OS/2 1.1 or higher. The .inc files are defined as follows:
Level 1:

Level 2:

SYSMAC.INC
This file sets up all the API macros by calling DOSCALLS.INC
and SUBCALLS.INC.
OS/2 kernel
DOSCALLS.INC
This file sets up all macros for Dos calls.
SUBCALLS.INC
This file sets up all macros for kbd, Mou, and Vio calls.

E.2 THE KEYBOARD SERVICES
Table E.1 illustrates the keyboard services. These are available with the IBM OS/2
Toolkit referenced throughout the book.
TABLE E.1
Service

KbdStringln
KbdCharln
KbdPeek
KbdXlate

KEYBOARD FUNCTION CALLS
Description

Reads a string from the keyboard and loads a buffer
Reads a character and loads the associated internal
structure
Allows examination of a character data record
without removing it from the buffer
Translates a scancode and shift key state into an
ASCII character code, using the code page set for
the keyboard

E Keyboard and Mouse
Kernel Functions

In this book we describe the OS/2 Kernel API services which are used to access the
full-screen mode. In this appendix we discuss the keyboard and mouse services.
These calls cannot be used in a Presentation Manager application.

E.1

ACCESSING THE TOOLKIT
To employ the Toolkit functions [1] the programmer must resort to defining and
using various assembler and C structures and databases that contain parameter information. These structures and data types are contained in a set of files, with extension .inc for the assembler and a set of files with extension .h for the C compiler.
The .h files are defined as follows (we use .h and .H interchangeably):
Level 1:

Level 2:

OS/2 and Presentation Manager
OS2.H (includes OS2def.H, BSE.H, and PM.H)
This file sets up the compiler for access to all OS/2 definitions,
base include files, and files needed to define Presentation Manager data types, functions, and structures.
OS/2
0$2DEF.H
This file defines common constants, data types, error codes, and
structures needed to OS/2 kernel access.
313

App.D

312
TABLE D.1

Programs Used in This Book

(Concluded)

Program

Description

Page

dyn22.def
dyn2.asm
dyn33.def
gen3d.c
xadiskw.c
mmain3d.c
xadiskr.c
xscale.c
facet3d.c
gphrout.c

Definition file for load on call
Assembler program for run-time DLL
Definition file for dyn2.asm
C program that generates a surface
Diskwrite
Main calling program for 3D surface
Diskread
Scales array for mmain3d.c
Generates facets for mmain3d.c
Plot routines

236
238
239
255
256
257
260
261
262
263

Table D.2

MAKE Files Used in Text

Program

Description

Page

ioprgm.mak
swave.mak
prtwave.mak
pipestc.mak
pipeclc.mak
ckthred.mak
dja.mak
gen3d.mak
mmain3d.mak

MAKE file for ioprgm.c
MAKE file for swave.c
MAKE file for prtwave.c
MAKE file for pipestc.c
MAKE file for pipeclc.c
MAKE file for ckthred.c
MAKE file for dja.c
MAKE file for gen3d.c
MAKE file for mmain3d.c

173
178
184

197
197
198
212
254
256

App. D

311

Programs Used in This Book

TABLED.1

(Continued)

Program

Description

Page

prtscrm.asm
nos2512.asm

Modified prtscr.asm used with twolnm.asm
Creates shared segment, child process, and prints
screen
Child process that generates random numbers
Supplemental routines needed by nos2512.asm
Program that creates and reallocates memory
Program that allocates a huge segment
Program that suballocates memory
Program that sets up two threads using RAM
semaphores
Uses multiple threads to generate a box
Support routines for unos251.asm
Program that sets up two processes using system
semaphores
Child process using system semaphores
Pipe main setup program
Child process for pipe communications
Queue main setup program
Child process for queue example
C program to illustrate Protected Mode
C program to plot dynamic sinewave
C graphic routines used in cgraph.lib
C program to print sinewave
C program to print screen
C program counterpart to pipest.asm
C program counterpart to pipecl.asm
C program that creates a child thread
C program for rotating tetrahedron
C program that sets up tetrahedron
C program that calculates rotation matrices
C program that rotates a point
C program that removes a point from the display
C program that creates time-history/value database
C program that plots Dow Jones activity
C program to generate musical scales
Assembler routine to generate scales
Assembler program for preloaded DLL routines
Assembler routine that is DLL for dynl.asm
Initialization routine for DLL

101
106

nos261.asm
nos252.asm
memseg.asm
hugeseg.asm
suballo.asm
ckthl.asm
unos251.asm
nnos252.asm
ckprl.asm
os2p2.asm
pipest.asm
pipecl.asm
queuest.asm
queuecl.asm
ioprgm.c
swave.c
gphrout.c
prtwave.c
pprtscr.c
pipestc.c
pipeclc.c
ckthred.c
tetra.c
rotetra.c
rotmat.c
rotpt.c
DMApoint.c
timhist.c
dja.c
scales.c
scalesl.asm
dynl.asm
dlinkl.asm
dyninit.asm

111
113
117
122
126
132
136
141
146
149
152
155
158
161
172
180
183
186
190
194
196
199
205
208
209
209
211
212
213
225
226
232
234
235

D Programs Used
in This Book

In this appendix we list the programs used in this book. Table D.1 presents each
program, a brief description, and the page number corresponding to the program.
Table D.2 contains the MAKE files that appear in the text.
TABLE 0.1

PROGRAMS CONTAINED IN THE TEXT

Program

Description

Page

ptr2.asm
boxprtl.asm
scrld.asm
prtscr.asm
twoln.asm
graphl.asm
connl2.asm
slopeln.asm
bboxl.asm
llinev.asm
bbox.asm
twolnm.asm
scrldm.asm

Assembler program to print "74" to generate line
Assembler program to plot two lines to display
Assembler procedure to load screen buffer
Assembler procedure to print the screen
Assembler procedure to plot/print two lines
Partial contents of GRAPHLIB.LIB
Procedure to plot connected line
Program to plot connecting line
Procedure to generate a box
Procedure to generate a vertical line
Program to plot/print box
Modified twoln.asm that creates a screen buffer
Modified scrld.asm used with twolnm.asm

46
56
62
65
69
72
76
78
82
83
84
97
100

310

App.C

Function Declarations and Macros Used to Interface the API

@VioScrLock

macro
@def
@pw
@ps
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2, m3
VIOSCRLOCK
ml
m2
m3
far ptr VIOSCRLOCK

309

;waitflag
;status
;handle

use: Figure 2.3, 2.7b, 2.8, 2.10, 2.15, 3.1, 3.6, 3.18b, 3.19
@VioScrUnLock

macro
@def
@pw
call
endm

ml
VIOSCRUNLOCK
ml
far ptr VIOSCRUNLOCK

;selector

use: Figure 2.3, 2.7b, 2.8, 2.10, 2.15, 3.1, 3.4, 3.6, 3.18b, 3.19
@VioScrollUp

macro
@def
@pw
@pw
@pw
@pw
@pw
@ps
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2, m3, m4, ms, m6, m7
VIOSCROLLUP
ml
;top
m2
;left
m3
;bottom
m4
;right
m5
;number lines
m6
;attribute
m7
;handle
far ptr VIOSCROLLUP

use: Figure 2.3, 2.8, 3.6, 3.l 7b, 3.18b, 3.20b, 3.22b
@VioSetMode

macro
@def
@ps
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2
VIOSETMODE
ml
m2
far ptr VIOSETMODE

;modedata
;handle

use: Figure 2.3, 2.7b, 2.10, 2.15, 3.1, 3.4, 3.18b
@VioWrtTTY

macro
@def
@ps
@pw
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2, m3
VIOWRTTTY
ml
m2
m3
far ptr VIOWRTTTY

use: Figure 3.l 7b, 3.20b, 3.2lb, 3.23b, 3.24b

;charstr
;length
;handle

308

App. C
@DosSubSet

Function Declarations and Macros Used to Interface the API
macro
@def
@pw
@pw
@pw
call

ml, m2, m3
DOS SUBSET
ml
m2
m3
far ptr DOSSUBSET

macro
@def
@pw
@ps
@pw
@ps
call
endm

ml, m2, m3, m4
DOS WRITE
ml
m2
m3
m4
far ptr DOSWRITE

;selector
;flags
;size

use: Figure 3.15
@DosWrite

;handle
;buffer
;length
;byteswritten

use: Figure 2.1, 2.6b, 3.3, 3.22b
@DosWriteQueuel macro
@def
@pw
@pw
@pw
@pd
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2, m3, m4, ms
DOSWRITEQUEUEl
ml
m2
m3
m4
ms
far ptr DOSWRITEQUEUEl

;handle
; request
; length
; buffer
;priority

use: Figure 3.25b
@KbdStringin

macro
@def
@ps
@ps
@pw
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2, m3, m4
KBDSTRINGIN
ml
m2
m3
m4
far ptr KBDSTRINGIN

;buffer
;length
;iowait
;handle

use: Figure 2.3, 2.2b, 2.10, 2.15, 3.1, 3.4, 3.18b
@VioGetPhysBuf

macro
@def
@ps
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2
VIOGETPHYSBUF
ml
m2
far ptr VIOGETPHYSBUF

use: Figure 2.3, 2.7b, 2.8, 2.10, 2.15, 3.1, 3.4, 3.6, 3.18b, 3.19

;structure
;reserved

App.C

Function Declarations and Macros Used to Interface the API
call
endm

far ptr DOSREADQUEUE

macro
@def
@pw
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2
DOSREALLOCSEG
ml
m2
far ptr DOSREALLOCSEG

macro
@def
@pd
call
endm

ml
DOSSEMCLEAR
ml
far ptr DOSSEMCLEAR

use: Figure 3.24b
@DosReAllocSeg

;size
;selector

use: Figure 3.8
@DosSemClear

;handle

use: Figure 3.17b, 3.2lb, 3.23b
@DosSemSet

macro
@def
@pd
call
endm

ml
DOSSEMSET
ml
far ptr DOSSEMSET

;handle

use: Figure 3.l 7b, 3.20b, 3.22b
@DosSemWait

macro
@def
@pd
@pd
call
endm

ml, m2
DOSSEMWAIT
ml
m2
far ptr DOSSEMWAIT

;handle
;timeout

use: Figure 3.l 7b, 3.20b, 3.22b
@DosSubAlloc

use: Figure 3.15

macro
@def
@pw
@ps
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2, m3
DOSSUBALLOC
ml
m2
m3
far ptr DOSSUBALLOC

;selector
;offset
;size

307

306

App.C

Function Declarations and Macros Used to Interface the API
@pw
@pw
@pw
@pd
call
endm

m5
m6
m7
m8
far ptr DOSOPEN

;attribute
;openflag
;openmode

macro
@def
@ps
@ps
@ps
call
endm

ml, m2, m3
DOSOPENQUEUE
ml
m2
m3
far ptr DOSOPENQUEUE

macro
@def
@ps
@ps
call
endm

ml, m2
DOSOPENSEM
ml
m2
far ptr DOSOPENSEM

macro
@def
@pw
@ps
@pw
@ps
call
endm

ml, m2, m3, m4
DOS READ
ml
m2
m3
m4
far ptr DOS READ

macro
@def
@pw
@ps
@ps
@ps
@pw
@pw
@ps
@pd

ml, m2, m3, m4,
DOSREADQUEUE
ml
m2
m3
m4
m5
m6
m7
m8

;O

use: Figure 2.1, 2.6b
@DosOpenQueue

;owner ID
;handle
;name

use: Figure 3.25b
@DosOpenSem

;handle
;name

use: Figure 3.2lb, 3.23b
@DosRead

;handle
;buffer
;length
;bytesread

use: Figure 3.23b
@DosReadQueue

m5,

m6,

m7,

ma

;handle
;request
;length
;address
;code
;nowait
;priority
;semhandle

App.C

305

Function Declarations and Macros Used to Interface the API
call
endm

far ptr DOSGETHUGESHIFT

macro
@def
@ps
@ps
call
endm

ml, m2
DOSGETSHRSEG
ml
m2
far ptr DOSGETSHRSEG

macro
@def
@pw
@pw
@ps
call
endm

ml, m2, m3
DOSGIVESEG
ml
m2
m3
far ptr DOSGIVESEG

use: Figure 3.12
@DosGetShrSeg

iname
iselector

use: Figure 3.5, 3.23b
@DosGiveSeg

icaller sel
iprocess ID
irecipient sel

use: Figure 3.25b
@DosKillProcess macro
@def
@pw
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2
DOSKILLPROCESS
ml
m2
far ptr DOSKILLPROCESS

iaction
iresult

use: Figure 3.4, 3.20b, 3.22b, 3.24b
@DosMakePipe

macro
@def
@ps
@ps
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2, m3
DOSMAKEPIPE
ml
m2
m3
far ptr DOSMAKEPIPE

macro
@def
@ps
@ps
@ps
@pd

ml, m2, m3, m4, mS,
DOS OPEN
ml
m2
m3
m4

iread hdl
iwrite hdl
isize

use: Figure 3.22b
@Dos Open

m6,

m7,

m8

iname
ihandle
iaction
isize

304

App. C

Function Declarations and Macros Used to Interface the API
call
endm

far ptr DOSCREATESEM

use: Figure 3.20b, 3.22b
@DosCreateThread macro
@def
@pd
@ps
@pd
call
endm

ml, m2, m3
DOSCREATETHREAD
ml
;address
;thread ID
m2
m3
;end stack
far ptr DOSCREATETHREAD

use: Figure 3.l 7b, 3.18b
@DosExecPgm

macro
@def
@ps
@pw
@pw
@ps
@ps
@ps
@ps
call
endm

ml, m2, m3, m4, ms,
DOSEXECPGM
ml
m2
m3
m4
ms
m6
m7
far ptr DOSEXECPGM

m6,

m7
; name buffer
;length
;flags
;argpointer
;envpointer
;retrun
;pgmpointer

use: Figure 3.4, 3.20b, 3.22b, 3.24b
@DosExit

macro
@def
@pw
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2
DOSEXIT
ml
m2
far ptr DOSEXIT

macro
@def
@pw
call
endm

ml
DOSFREESEG
ml
far ptr DOSFREESEG

;action
;result

use: all processes
@DosFreeSeg

;selector

use: Figure 3.1, 3.4, 3.5, 3.12, 3.15, 3.24b, 3.25b
@DosGetHugeShift macro
@def
@ps

ml
DOSGETHUGESHIFT
ml

;shiftcount

App. C

Function Declarations and Macros Used to Interface the API

@DosAllocShrSeg macro
@def
@pw
@ps
@ps
call
endm

ml, m2, m3
DOSALLOCSHRSEG
ml
m2
m3
far ptr DOSALLOCSHRSEG

303

ino. bytes
:name
:selector

use: Figure 3.4, 3.22b
@DosBeep

macro
@def
@pw
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2
DOS BEEP
ml
m2
far ptr DOS BEEP

:hertz
:duration

use: Figure 3.l 7b, 3.18b, 3.20b, 3.2lb, 3.22b, 3.23b, 3.24b, 3.25b
@DosClose

macro
@def
@pw
call
endm

ml
DOSCLOSE
ml
far ptr DOSCLOSE

:handle

use: Figure 2.1, 2.6b, 3.3, 3.4
@DosCloseQueue

macro
@def
@pw
call
endm

ml
DOSCLOSEQUEUE
ml
far ptr DOSCLOSEQUEUE

@DosCreateQueue macro
@def
@ps
@pw
@ps
call
endm

ml, m2, m3
DOSCREATEQUEUE
ml
m2
m3
far ptr DOSCREATEQUEUE

:handle

use: Figure 3.24b, 3.25b

:handle
:priority
:name

use: Figure 3.24b
@DosCreateSem

macro
@def
@pw
@ps
@ps

ml, m2, m3
DOSCREATESEM
ml
m2
m3

:no exclusive
:handle
:name

302

App.C
@ps

@pd

Function Declarations and Macros Used to Interface the API
;push address

macro
mov
push
mov
push
endm

ml
ax,
ax
ax,
ax

macro
push
push
mov
mov
mov
push
mov
push
push
pop
xchg
pop
mov
pop
pop
push
endm

ml
ds
bx
ax, SEG ml
ds, ax
bx, OFFSET ml
word ptr [bx]
ax, [bx+2]
bp
sp
bp
[bp+6], ax
bp
ds, ax
ax
bx
ax

SEG ml
OFFSET ml

;push doubleword

With these preliminary macros defined it is now possible to define the macro calls
used in the book.
@DosAllocHuge

macro
@def
@pw
@pw
@ps
@pw
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2, m3, m4, m5
DOSALLOCHUGE
ml
m2
m3
m4
m5
far ptr DOSALLOCHUGE

macro
@def
@pw
@ps
@pw
call
endm

ml, m2, m3
DOSALLOCSEG
ml
m2
m3
far ptr DOSALLOCSEG

;no. segments
;size last seg
;selector
;max seg
;flags

use: Figure 3.12
@DosAllocSeg

use: Figure 3.1, 3.8, 3.15, 3.25b

;no. bytes
;selector
;flags

App. C

Function Declarations and Macros Used to Interface the API

301

points determined by symbols such as INCL_BASE. Typically, these include files
are:
Level 1 (OS/2):
Level 2 (OS/2):

Level 3 (OS/2):

Level 2 (PM):

Level 3 (PM):

os/2.inc (includes os/2.def.inc.bse.inc, and pm.inc)
os/2def.inc (defines constants, types, error codes, and structures)
bse.inc (includes bsedos.inc, bsesub.inc, and bseerr.inc)
bsedos.inc (defines constants, structures, and prototypes for
the Dos API)
bsesub.inc (sets up calls for Via, Kbd, and Mou API)
bseerr.inc. (sets up error code constants for all API calls)
pm.inc (includes pmwin.inc, pmgpi.inc, pmdef.inc,
pmavio.inc, pmspl.inc, pmpic.inc, pmord.inc, pmbitmap.inc,
pmfont.inc)
pmwin.inc (sets up windows, message manager, keyboard,
mouse, and dialog manager API calls)
purgpi.inc (sets up Gpi API calls)
pmdev.inc (sets up device context API calls)
pmavio.inc (sets up the PM Via API calls)
pmspl.inc [sets up the spool (Spl) API calls]
pmpic.inc (sets up the picture API calls)
pmord.inc (sets up the GOCA orders for the Gpi API calls)
pmbitmap.inc (sets up the bitmap types)
pmfont.inc (sets up the types for fonts)

These include files contain macros for loading API service routines and pushing the stack with appropriate parameter data. In this appendix it is desirable to
present a similar set of macro-based or function calls used in the assembly language
in this book. These macros bridge the gap between the macro calls used in the text
and the actual assembler code required to lead a particular API service. They are
very similar to the macros available through the Toolkit. We ignore the error-processing features of the Toolkit macros and leave the addition of these features to the
reader. With these thoughts in mind, let us begin with several subordinate macro
definitions:
@pw

macro
mov
push
endm

ml
ax,ml
ax

ipush word

@def

macro
if ndef
extrn
endi f
endm

nm
nm
nm: far

idefine API entry

C Function Declarations
and Macros Used
to Interface the API

The IBM Programmer's Toolkit Versions 1.0 and 1.1 [1.2] contain a set of assembler macros and C function declarations that provide interfaces to the API services.
In addition, Version 1.1 contains macros and C function declarations for accessing
the Presentation Manager (PM). In this appendix we address similar interfaces for
C and assembler and provide the relevant code for the macro calls (assembler) and
function declarations (C) used in this book. The reader is referred to the Toolkit for
a complete discussion of similar macros and function declarations.

C. 1 THE ASSEMBLER INTERFACE
The primary assembler include file in Version 1.0, and available under Version 1.1,
is
sysmac.inc

This, in turn, calls
doscalls.inc
subcalls.inc

which loads Dos, Mou, Kbd, and Vio service macros.
Under Version 1.1, a new set of include files is provided with variable entry
300

App. B

Microsoft C Compiler Version 5.1

299

We can use pointers to access this structure through the same approach; for example, the fifth element can be accessed using
pear_type ->

•••

These two statements have identical results.
In a structure, space is reserved for each element. In a union, space is reserved
only for the largest element; all other elements must share this space. For example,
in the following template:
union
{

int c;
int d;
float g;
double h;
} letter,

*pletter;

the largest amount of space reserved for the union is 8 bytes with the h variable. All
the remaining variables must share the space in storage with this variable amount.
Since c and d each occupy 2 bytes and g occupies 4 bytes, this union can be used
to store c, d, and g simultaneously, or, alternatively, h or other combinations less
than or equal to 8 bytes.
This discussion completes our brief look at C. We have attempted to touch
only on those syntax features that are used in programming the OS/2 Kernel.

REFERENCES
1. Microsoft C 5.1 Optimizing Compiler: Code View, and Utilities, Microsoft Editor, MixedLanguage Programming Guide, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1987.
2. Microsoft C 5.1 Optimizing Compiler: Run-Time Library Reference, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1987.
3. Microsoft C 5.1 Optimizing Compiler: User's Guide and Language Reference, Microsoft
Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1987.
4. Godfrey, J. T., Applied C: The IBM Microcomputers, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1990.
5. Petzold, C., Programming the OS/2 Presentation Manager, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, 1989.

298

App.B

Microsoft C Compiler Version 5.1

In many respects C is the language of choice for programming the API once
the programmer obtains a familiarity with its features. Certainly, C is the choice for
programming the Presentation Manager [5].
The structure for a function in C has the following form:
function_name()
formal parameter types
{

local parameter types
statements
return expression;
}

Here the lines of code immediately following the function definition statement
contain the typing for formal parameters. The function brackets are next, with the
local parameter typing contained within the function brackets, together with all remaining function statements. If a value such as d is to be returned, this value is assigned and used as the argument of a return( ) statement.
A structure, for example, can look as follows:
struct tag_name
{

type declarations
} struct_name;

This architecture allows a tag name identifier, tag_name, to be used with later
definitions to define a structure that has similar characteristics. For example, the
structure
struct car
{

char olds, chevy, pontiac;
char accura, honda, mazda;
char ford, lincoln, mercury;
} car_type, *pcar_type;

has as tag, car, and as structure name, car_type. The structure elements can be
accessed using a period to offset the element from the structure name. In the structure above the fifth element is accessed using
car_type.honda ==

•••

App.B

297

Microsoft C Compiler Version 5.1

contains some additional operators of less utility. The basic C data types are as
follows:
int
long
short
unsigned

integer (2 bytes); signed
integer (4 bytes); signed
integer (2 bytes); signed
integer; zero or positive values
unsigned int (2 bytes);
unsigned long (4 bytes);
unsigned short (2 bytes);

char
float
double

character ( 1 byte)
floating (4 bytes);
floating (8 bytes);

0
0
0

- 255
- 65535

- 255

38
38
-10307
+10307
+10
-10

-

Within the OS/2 Kernel programming are a number of additional derived types
used by Microsoft and IBM to expand the flexibility of OS/2. Some of these types
are
SEL
segment selector
PSEL
pointer to selector
SHANDLE
handle
BYTE
byte (char)
PC HAR
pointer to character
HF ILE
handle to file
HSEM
handle to semaphore
PU INT
pointer to unsigned integer
HVIO
handle to video context
TIO
thread ID
The addition of the Presentation Manager files adds many more derived types to the
OS/2 inventory.
The basic C storage classes are auto, external, static, and register:
auto
external
static
register

generated with temporary duration within a module as a
local class
generated for all time as a global
generated for all time but local in scope
generated with temporary duration within a module as
local and, if possible, associated with a CPU register

The remaining topics to be briefly examined are functions, structures, unions,
and pointers. This, then, will complete our look at the C syntax. The examples in
the text are intended to provide additional insight into the C language and its applicability in the OS/2 programming environment.

296

App.B

Microsoft C Compiler Version 5.1

When expression2 is evaluated TRUE, the associated statements are executed. Once
the continue statement is executed, the processing jumps to the end of the loop
without entering the second if structure regardless of whether expression3 is TRUE
or FALSE.
Table B.1 illustrates the major operators found in the C language. Table B.2
TABLE B.1

C OPERATORS

Operator

Discussion

<>

Grouping
Executes all contained syntax
Increment
Decrement
Multiply
Divide
Add
Subtract
Less than
Greater than
Less than or equal
Greater than or equal
AND: logical
OR: logical
Equal: assignment
Adds right-hand quantity to left hand
Subtracts right-hand quantity from left hand
Multiplies left hand by right hand
Divides left hand by right hand
Equal to: relational
Not equal to: relational
Modulus
Modulus after dividing left hand by right hand
Pointer: gives the value at the pointed address
Pointer: gives the address of the variable

<>
++

*
I

+

<
>
<=
>=

u

l l
+=

*=
I=
!=
'X.

z=
*
s.

TABLE B.2

ADDITIONAL C OPERATORS

Operator

Discussion

(type)

Changes the type of a variable
Returns the size in bytes of the variable
Assigns a structure member
Assigns a structure member
NOT: bitwise
Takes one's complement: bitwise
AND: bitwise
EXCLUSIVE OR: bitwise
OR: bitwise
Conditional operator
Left shift: bitwise
Right shift: bitwise

sizeof

->

?:

«
»

Microsoft C Compiler Version 5.1

App.B

295

Here the alternate statements are executed when expression is FALSE. The case,
switch, and default statements work together. Consider the following structure:
switch

(expression)

{

case A:
statement #1;
break;
case B:
statement #2;
break;
case C:
statement #3;
break;
default:
statement N;
break;
}

Here, if the value of expression takes on A, B, C, ... the corresponding case sequence is executed. For all values not specified with a subsequent case statement,
the default statement sequence is executed.
The switch decision structure is used frequently in the Presentation Manager
windows processing. We do not use this structure because the examples in this book
did not involve multiple options. The break syntax was used to jump around subsequent statements once the preceding statement had been executed.
There are two statements that can be used to alter the sequence of processing.
These are the jump statements, continue and goto. Consider the following loop:
for(expressionl)
{

statements
if{expression2)
{

alternatel

statements

continue;
}

if(expression3)
{

alternate2
}
}

statements

294

App.B

Microsoft C Compiler Version 5.1

for (k=l;k<=N;k++)
{

statements
}

The while loop has the form
while(expression)
{

statements
}

where expression is returned as a TRUE or FALSE value. When TRUE the statements in the brackets are executed. Otherwise, the processing passes to subsequent
statements, outside the brackets.
The do while loop has an inverted structure with a test at the end of the loop:
do
{

statements
} while(expression)

Here statements are executed the first time through the loop and each subsequent
time that expression evaluates TRUE.
Decision structures are represented by the if, else, case, switch, and default
statements. The if structure is of the form
if(expression)
{

statements
}

where a TRUE value for expression causes the statements to be executed. The else
statement appears as follows, and is used in conjunction with the if statement:
if(expression)
{

statements
}

else
{

alternate statements
}

BMicrosoft C
Compiler Version 5. l

In Part III of this book the OS/2 Kernel was programmed using the C language. The
specific C implementaion used was the Version 5.1 C Optimizing Compiler developed by the Microsoft Corporation [1-3]. This compiler was one of the first that
was made commercially available that would execute in the Protected Mode, so that
it could be used with OS/2. Associated with the compiler is a Toolbox that is discussed in Appendix C. This Toolbox provides high-level C interfaces to the OS/2
APL These interfaces are suitable for use with the Microsoft C compilers and are
provided as a set of .h include files.
In this appendix we briefly review some of the C language syntax used in this
book. We assume that the reader has a familiarity with C, hence we only provide
this appendix for reference. The following categories are mentioned:
1. Control structures
2. Operators
3. Data types and storage classes
4. Other syntax

The treatment of this appendix is similar to that given in Applied C: The IBM Microcomputers [4].
The basic control structures fall into three categories: loops, decision structures,
and jumps. Loops consist of the for, while, and do while syntax. The for loop structure takes the form, for example:
293

292
TABLE A.11

App.A
(Concluded)

Instruction

Purpose

Comments

FENl/FNENI

Enable interrupts

FLDCW source

Load control
word

FSTCW/FNSTCW
destination

Store control
word

FSTSW/FNSTSW
destination

Store status
word

FCLEX/FNCLEX

Clear exceptions
Store environment

FSTENV/FNSTENV
destination
FLDENV source
FSAVE/FNSAVE
destination
FRSTOR source
FINCSTP
FFREE destination
FDECSTP
FNOP
FWAIT

IBM Macro Assembler/2

Load environment
Save state
Restore state
Increment stack
pointer
Free register
Decrement stack
pointer
No operation
Wait instruction

This instruction is the reverse of FDISI and
clears the interrupt mask in the control
word.
This instruction replaces the current control
word with the word defined by the source
operand.
This instruction writes the current control
word to the memory location defined by
destination.
This instruction writes the current status word
to the memory location defined by destination.
Clears all exception flags, the interrupt request
and busy flag.
Writes the basic status and exception pointers
to the memory location defined by destination.
Reloads the 8087 environment from the memory area defined by the source.
Writes the environment and register stack to
the memory location specified by the destination operand.
Reloads the 8087 from the source operand.
Adds I to the stack pointer.
Changes the destination's tag to empty.
Subtracts I from the stack pointer.
Causes no operation.
Causes the 8088 to wait until the current 8087
instruction is complete before the 8088 executes another instruction.

REFERENCES
1. IBM Macro Assembler Version 2.00 Language Reference, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1984.
2. IBM Macro Assembler Version 2.00 Fundamentals: Assemble, Link, and Run, International Business Machines Corporation, Boca Raton, FL, 1984.
3. Godfrey, J. T., IBM Microcomputer Assembly Language: Beginning to Advanced, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989.

App.A
TABLE A.11

IBM Macro Assembler/2

291

(Continued)

Instruction

Purpose

Comments

FICOM source

Integer compare

FICOMP source

Integer compare/
pop

FTST

Test

FXAM

Examine

This instruction compares ST(O) to the source
operand, which is an integer-memory operand.
This instruction is identical to FICOM except
the stack top, ST(O), is popped following
the compare.
This instruction tests ST(O) relative to +0.0.
The result of the test is returned in the condition code of the status word: (C3, CO) =
(0, 0) for ST positive, (0, 1) for ST negative,
(1, 0) for ST zero, and (1,1) if ST cannot
be compared.
The stack top, ST(O), is examined and the
result returned in the condition code field
as specified in the Version 2.0 Macro Assembler Reference manual.

Transcendental
FPTAN

FPATAN

Partial tangent

Partial arc tangent

F2XM1

FYLZX

FYLZXP1
Constant
FLDZ
FLD1
FLDP1
FLDL2T

FLDL2E
FLDLGZ
FLDLN2
Control
FIN IT /FNINIT
FDISI/FNOISI

Y * log2
(X + 1)

Load zero
Load +1.0
Load pi
Load log2(10)

This instruction calculates Y/X = TAN(z).
The value z is contained in ST(O) prior to
execution. Following execution, Y is contained in ST(l) and X contained in.ST(O).
This instruction calculates z = ARCTAN(Y/
X), where Xis ST(O) and Y is ST(l). The
result, z, is returned to ST(O).
This instruction calculates 2x - l, where x
is taken from ST(O) and must be in the
range (0, 0.5). The result is replaced in
ST(O).
This instruction calculates Y * log 2(X), where
X is ST(O) and Y is ST(l). The stack top
is popped and the result returned to the
new ST(O).
This instruction is the same as FYL2X except
1 is added to X. X must be in the range
(0, 1 - Y2t2).

Load log 2( e)
Load log 10(2)
Load loge(2)

This instruction loads +0.0 in ST(O).
This instruction loads + 1.0 in ST(O).
This instruction loads pi into ST(O).
This instruction loads log2(10) into the stack
top, ST(O).
This instruction loads log 2(e) into ST(O).
This instruction loads log 10(2) into ST(O).
This instruction loads loge(2) into ST(O).

Initialize processor
Disable interrupts

This instruction accomplishes a hardware reset
of the 8087.
This instruction prevents the 8087 from issuing an interrupt request.

290
TABLE A.11

App.A
(Continued)

Instruction

Purpose

FIDIV source

Integer divide

FDIVR

Real reversed
divide

FDIVRP destination 1
source

Real reversed
divide/pop

FIDIVR source

Integer divide
reversed

Miscellaneous
FSQRT

Square root

FSCALE

Scale

FPREl'I

Partial remainder

FRNDINT

Round to integer

FXTRACT

Extract exponent/significand
Absolute value

FABS
Change sign
FCHS
Comparison
FCOl'I

IBM Macro Assembler/2

Real compare

FCOl'IP

Real compare/
pop

FCOl'IPP

Real compare/
pop twice

Comments

This instruction divides the destination by the
source and returns the quotient to the destination. The destination is ST(O) and the
source is an integer-memory operand.
This instruction is identical with FDIV except
the source is divided by the destination.
The quotient is still returned in the destination.
This instruction is identical to FDIVP except
the source is divided by the destination.
The quotient is still returned in the destination.
This instruction is identical to FIDIV except
the source is divided by the destination.
The quotient is still returned in the destination.
This instruction replaces the content of ST(O)
with its square root.
This instruction interprets the value of the
number contained in ST( I) as an integer.
This value is added to the exponent -of the
number in ST(O), which is equivalent to
multiplying ST(O) by 2 raised to this integer
power.
This instruction takes the modulo of ST relative to the number contained in ST(l). The
sign is the same as that of ST(O).
This instruction rounds ST(O) to an integer.
The rules for rounding are determined by
setting the RC field of the control word.
RC = 00 (round to nearest integer), 01
(round downward, IO (round upward), and
11 (round toward 0).
This instruction reduces the number in ST(O)
to a significand and an exponent for 80bit arithmetic.
This instruction yields the absolute value of
ST(O).
This instruction reverses the sign of ST(O).
This instruction compares the source operand
[which can be specified as a real-memory
operand or implicit as ST(l)] and ST(O).
This instruction is identical with FCOM except
the stack top, ST(O), is popped following
the compare.
This instruction is identical with FCOM except
the stack top, St(O), and ST(l) are popped
following the compare.

App.A
TABLE A.11

IBM Macro Assembler/2

289

(Continued)

Instruction

Purpose

Comments

FISUB source

Integer subtraction

The destination, ST(O), has the source operand, an integer-memory operand, subtracted from it and the result is stored in
ST(O).

FSUBR

Real reversed
subtract

The destination is subtracted from the source
and the result left in the destination. The
operand configuration is the same as for
FSUB.

FSUBRP

Real reversed
subtract/pop

This instruction is the same as FSUBP except
the destination is subtracted from the
source. ST(O) still serves as the source operand.

FISUBR source

Integer reversed
subtract

This instruction is the same as FISUB except
the destination is subtracted from the
source. The source is still an integer-memory operand.

FMUL

Real multiply

This instruction multiplies the destination operand by the source and returns the product
in the destination. The instruction can be
executed with no operands [ST(O) is the
implied source and ST(l) the destination],
with the source specified as a real-memory
operand and ST(O) the destination, and with
both destination register and source register
[one of which is ST(O)] specified.

FMULP destination 1
source

Real multiply/
pop

FIMUL source

Integer multiply

This instruction uses ST(O) as the source operand and another register as the destination.
The product is returned in the destination
register and the stack top popped.
This instruction multiplies the destination by
the source and returns the product in the
destination. The destination is ST(O) and
source is an integer-memory operand.

Multiplication

Division
FDIV

Real divide

This instruction divides the destination by the
source and returns the quotient to the destination. The instruction can be executed with
no operands [ST(O) is the implied source
and ST(l) the implied destination], with a
source specified and ST(O) the implied destination, and with a source [ST(O)] and destination (another register) specified.

FDIVP destination 1
source

Real divide/pop

This instruction divides the destination by the
source and returns the quotient to the destination. It then pops the top of the 8087
stack. The source is the ST(O) register and
the destination operand is another stack register.

288
TABLE A.11

App.A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

COPROCESSOR INSTRUCTION SET

Instruction

Purpose

Comments

Data transfer
FLO source

Load real

FST destination

Store real

FSTP destination

Store real/pop

FXCH destination

Exchange ST

FILO source

Load integer

FIST destination

Store integer

FISTP destination

Store integer/
pop

FBLO source

Load BCD

FBSTP destination

Store BCD/pop

Pushes the source data onto the top of the
register stack, ST(O).
This instruction copies ST(O) into the indicated
destination (real), which can be a memory
operand or register.
This instruction copies ST(O) into the indicated
destination and then pops ST(O) off the
stack.
This instruction exchanges ST(O) with the indicated destination.
This instruction pushes the source data (integer) onto the top of the stack, ST(O).
This instruction stores ST(O), the stack top,
in the indicated destination, which must be
an integer memory operand.
This instruction stores ST(O), the stack top,
in the indicated destination, which must be
an integer memory operand, and then pops
ST(O) off the stack.
This instruction pushes the source, which must
be a BCD number, onto the stack at ST(O).
This instruction stores ST(O) as a BCD number
at the destination and pops ST(O) off the
stack.

Addition
FAOO

Real addition

FAOOP destination 1
source

Real add/pop

FIAOO inte!fermemo rY

Integer addition

This instruction can be used without operands
[assumes ST(l) added to ST(O) with the
result in ST(O)], with a real-memory operand added to ST(O), or with explicit reference to ST(O) added to another register.
The source is ST(O) and the destination must
be another stack register. The result is left
in the alternate stack register used as the
destination.
The destination, ST(O), is added to the source,
iriteger memory, and the sum returned in
ST(O).

Subtraction
FSUB

Real subtraction

FSUBP destination 1
source

Real subtract/
pop

This instruction can be used without operands
[assumes ST(l) is the destination and ST(O)
is subtracted from it with the result in
ST(l)], with a real-memory operand subtracted from ST(O) and the result in ST(O),
or with explicit reference to ST(O) and another register (the destination containing the
result).
The source, ST(O), is subtracted from the destination, another stack register, and the result stored in the destination.

App.A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

TABLE A.10

287

SPECIAL-PURPOSE MACRO OPERATORS

Operator

Description

Format: text&text. This operator concatenates text er symbols. An example
is
TC1

;;

'X.

MACRO
x
LEA OX, CHAR&X
MDV AH, 8
INT 21H
ENOM

Here a call TCl A would load DX with a character start position CHARA.
Format: ;;text. A comment preceded by two semicolons is not produced
as part of the expansion when a MACRO or REPT is defined in an
assembly.
Format: !character. Causes the character to be interpreted as a literal
value, not a symbol.
Format: %expression. Converts expression to a number. During expansion,
the number is substituted for expression. Consider
MAC1
L1

MACRO
MAC2
ENOM

MAC2
MACRO
PROO&X DB
ENOM

x
x * 1000
'.l'.Ll .x

y,x
'Production No. &X = &Y'

This yiolds "PRODS
DB
when called with MACl 5.

'Production No. 5 = 5000,' "

286
TABLE A.9

Pseudo-op
• LFCOND
• L I s T an d
, XLI ST

'l:OUT

PAGE

• SFCOND
SUBTTL
• TFCOND
TITLE
ENDM
EX ITM

IRP

IRPC

LOCAL

MACRO

PURGE

App. A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

(Concluded)
Description

This pseudo-op causes the listing of conditional blocks that evaluate
as false .
. LIST causes a listing of source and object code in the output assembler
list file .. XLIST turns this listing off. These pseudo-ops can be
used to selectively list code during the assembly of programs,
especially long sequences of instructions.
Form: %OUT text. This pseudo-op is used to monitor progress through
a long assembly. The argument "text" is displayed, when encountered, during the assembly process.
Form: PAGE operandi, operand2. Controls the length (operandi)
in lines and the width (operand2) in characters of the assembler
list file .
This pseudo-op suppresses the listing of conditional blocks that evaluate as false.
Form: SUBTTL text. Generates a subtitle to be listed after each
listing of title.
This pseudo-op changes the listing setting (and default) for false
conditionals to the opposite state.
Form: TITLE text. This pseudo-op specifies a title to be listed on
each page of the assembler listing. It may be used only once.
ENDM is the terminator for MACRO, REPT, IRP, and IRPC.
EXITM provides an exit to an expansion (REPT, IRP, IRPC, or
MACRO) when a test proves that the remaining expansion is not
needed.
Form: IRP dummy, <operandlist>. The number of operands (separated by commas) in operandlist determines the number of times
the following code (terminated by ENDM) is repeated. At each
repetition, the next item in operandlist is substituted for all occurrences of dummy.
Form: IRPC dummy, string. This is the same as IRP except at each
repetition the next character in string is substituted for all occurrences of dummy.
Form: LOCAL dummylist. LOCAL is used inside a MACRO structure. The assembler creates a unique symbol for each entry in
dummylist during each expansion of the macro. This avoids the
problem of a multiply defined label, for example, when multiple
expansions of the same macro take place in a program.
Form: name MACRO dummylist. The statements following the
MACRO definition, before ENDM, are the macro. Dummylist
contains the parameters to be replaced when calling the macro
during assembly. The form of this call is name parmlist. Parmlist
consists of the actual parameters (separated by commas) used in
the expansion.
Form: PURGE macro-name, . . . . PURGE deletes the definition
of a specified MACRO and allows the space to be used. This is
beneficial when including a macro library during assembly but
desiring to remove those macros not used during the assembly.

App.A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

TABLE A.9

Pseudo-op

END
ENDP
ENDS
EQU

EVEN
EXTRN
GROUP
INCLUDE
LABEL
NAME
DRG
PROC
PUBLIC
.RADIX
RECORD
SEGMENT
STRUC
.CREFand
• XCREF
• LALL I . SALL I
and .XALL

285

(Continued)
Description

Form: END [expression]. END identifies the end of the source program, and the optional expression identifies the name of the entry
point.
Form: procedure-name ENDP. Designates the end of a procedure.
Form: structure-name ENDS or seg-name ENDS. Designates the end
of a structure or segment.
Form: name EQU expression. Assigns the value of expression to
name. This value may not be reassigned.
Form: label = expression. Assigns the value of expression to label.
May be reassigned.
EVEN ensures that the code following starts on an even boundary.
Form: EXTRN name:type, . . . . EXTRN is used to indicate that
symbols used in this assembly module are defined in another
module.
Form: name GROUP seg-name, . . . . GROUP collects all segments
named and places them within a 64K physical segment.
Form: INCLUDE [drive] [path] filename.ext. INCLUDE assembles
source statements from an alternate source file into the current
source file.
Form: name LABEL type. LABEL defines the attributes of name
to be type.
Form: NAME module-name. NAME gives a module a name. It may
be used only once per assembly.
Form: ORG expression. The location counter is set to the value of
expression.
Form: procedure-name PROC [attribute]. PROC identifies a block
of code as a procedure and must end with RET/ENDP. The attribute
is NEAR or FAR.
Form: PUBLIC symbol, . . . . PUBLIC makes symbols externally
available to other linked modules.
Form: .RADIX expression .. RADIX allows the default base (decimal)
to be changed to a value between 2 and 16.
Form: recordname RECORD fieldname:width [=exp], . . . .
RECORD defines a bit pattern to format bytes and words for bit
packing (see text).
Form: segname SEGMENT [align-type] [combine-type] ['class'] (see
Chapter 3 for a discussion of this pseudo-op).
Form: structure-name STRUC. STRUC is used to allocate and initialize multibyte variables using DB, DD, DQ, DT, and DW. It must
end with ENDS.
This listing pseudo-op provides cross-reference information when a
filespec is indicated in response to the assembler prompt (CREF) .
It is the normal default condition .. XCREF results in no output
for cross reference when in force .
.LALL lists the complete macro text for all expansions .. SALL suppresses listing of all text and object code produced by macros.
.XALL produces a source line listing only if object code results.

284
TABLE A.9

Pseudo-op
ELSE
ENDIF
IF
IFB

IF DEF
IFDIF
IFE
IFIDN
IFNB
IFNDEF
IF1
IFZ

.20sc
.8086
.8087

ASSUME
COMMENT
DB
DD
DQ

OT

ow

App. A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

APPLICATION-ORIENTED PSEUDO-OPS

Description
This pseudo-op must be used in conjunction with a conditional pseudoop and serves to provide an alternate path.
This pseudo-op ends the corresponding IFxxx conditional.
Form: IF expression. When the expression is true, the code following
this pseudo-op is executed; otherwise it branches to an ELSE entry
point or an ENDIF. IF pseudo-ops can be nested.
Form: IFB <operand>. This is the "if blank" pseudo-op and it is
true if the operand has not been specified as in a MACRO call,
for example. The code following the IFB is executed when operand
is blank. Otherwise, the IP jumps to ENDIF.
Form: IFDEF symbol. If symbol has been defined via the EXTRN
pseudo-op, this is true and the code following the pseudo-op is
executed.
Form: IFDIF <operandi>, <operand2>. The code following this
pseudo-op is executed if the string operand I is different from the
string operand2.
Form: IFE expression. The code following this pseudo-op is executed
if expression = 0.
Form: IFIDN <operandi>, <operand2>. The code following this
pseudo-op is executed if the string operandi is identical to the
string operand2.
Form: IFNB <operand>. The code following this pseudo-op is executed if the operand is not blank.
Form: IFNDEF symbol. The code following this pseudo-op is executed
if the symbol has not been defined via the EXTRN pseudo-op.
This pseudo-op is true if the assembler is in pass I , and it is used
to load macros from a macro library (as an example).
This pseudo-op is true if the assembler is in pass 2, and it can be
used to inform the programmer what version of the program is
being used (when coupled with appropriate logic and a %OUT).
This pseudo-op tells the assembler to recognize and assemble 80286
instructions used by the IBM AT.
This pseudo-op tells the assembler not to recognize and assemble
80286 instructions.
This pseudo-op tells the assembler to recognize and assemble 8087
coprocessor instructions and data formats.
Form: ASSUME seg-reg: seg-name, . . . . This pseudo-op tells the
assembler which segment register segments belong to.
Form: COMMENT delimiter text delimiter. COMMENT allows the
programmer to enter comments without semicolons. It is not recognized by the SALUT program.
Form: [variable] DB [expression]. It is used to initialize byte storage.
DD has the same form as DB except it applies to doubleword quantities.
DQ has the same form as DB except it applies to four-word quantities.
DT has the same form as DB except it applies to 10-byte packed
decimal.
DW has the same form as DB except it applies to word quantities.

App. A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

TABLE A.8

Operator

283

(Concluded)
Type

Description

MASK

Record specific

WIDTH

Record specific

+

Arithmetic

The format of this operator is MASK recfield. It
returns a bit mask for the field. The mask has
bits set for positions included in the field and 0
for bits not included in the field.
The format of this operator is WIDTH recfield. It
evaluates to a constant in the range 1 to 16 and
returns the width of a record or record field.
Returns the sum of two terms. Form: terml +
term2.
Returns the difference of two terms. Form:
terml - term2.
Returns the product of two terms. Form: terml *
term2.
Form: terml MOD term2. It returns the remainder
obtained by dividing terml by term2.
Form: terml SHL term2. It shifts the bits of terml
left by the amount contained in term2. Zeros
are filled in the new bits.
Same as SHL except the shift is to the right.
Form: terml EQ term2. Returns a value -1 'TRUE)
if terml equals term2, or 0 (FALSE) otherwise.
Form: terml NE term2. Returns a value -1 (TRUE)
if terml does not equal term2, or 0 (FALSE)
otherwise.
Form: terml LT term2. Returns a value -1 (TRUE)
if term I is less than term2, or 0 (FALSE) otherwise.
Form: terml LE term2. Returns a value -1 (TRUE)
if terml is less than or equal to term2, or 0
(FALSE) otherwise.
Form: terml GT term2. Returns a value -1 (TRUE)
if terml is greater than term2, or 0 (FALSE)
otherwise.
Form: terml GE term2. Returns a value -1 (TRUE)
if terml is greater than or equal to term2, or 0
(FALSE) otherwise.
These operators have the form terml (operator)
term2 and return each bit position as follows:

Arithmetic

*

Arithmetic

MOD

Arithmetic

SHL

Arithmetic

SHR
EQ

Arithmetic
Relational

NE

Relational

LT

Relational

LE

Relational

GT

Relational

GE

Relational

AND1
OR1 and
XOR

Logical

NOT

Logical

terml bit

term2 bit

AND

OR

XOR

1
1
0
0

1
0
1
0

1
0
0
0

1
1
1
0

0
1

1
0

Form: NOT term. This operator complements each
bit of term.

282
TABLE A.8
Operator

App.A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

IBM MACRO ASSEMBLER OPERATORS
Type

PTR

Attribute

Se!f-re!f1
Se!f-naMe

Attribute

GrouP-naMe

Description

This operator has the form type PTR expression.
It is used to override the type attribute (BYTE,
WORD, DWORD, QWORD, or TBYTE) of a
variable or the attribute of a label (NEAR or
FAR). The expression field is the variable or
label that is to be overridden.
The segment override operator changes the segment
attribute of a label, variable, or address expression. It has three forms:
se!f-re!f:addr-exPression
se!f-naMe:addr-exPression
!frouP-naMe:addr-exPression

SHORT

Attribute

THIS

Attribute

HIGH

Attribute

LOW

Attribute

SEG

Value returning

OFFSET

Value returning

TYPE

Value returning

SIZE
LENGTH

Value returning
Value returning

SHIFT
COUNT

Record specific

This operator is used when a label follows a JMP
instruction and is within 127 bytes of the JMP.
It has the form JMP SHORT label and changes
the NEAR attribute. A pass 2 NOP instruction
is avoided.
The form of this operator is THIS type. The operator
produces an operand whose segment attribute is
equal to the defining segment, whose offset equals
IP, and a type attribute defined by "type." For
example, "AAA EQU THIS WORD" yields an
AAA with attribute WORD instead of NEAR
(if used in the same code segment).
This operator accepts a number/address argument
and returns the high-order byte.
This operator accepts a number/address argument
and returns the low-order byte.
This operator returns the segment value of the variable or label.
This operator returns the offset value of the variable
or label.
For operand arguments, this operator returns a value
equal to the number of bytes of the operand. If
a structure name, it returns the number of bytes
declared by STRUC. If the operand is a label,
it returns 65534 (FAR) and 65535 (NEAR).
This operator returns the value LENGTH x TYPE.
For a DUP entry, LENGTH returns the number
of units allocated for the variable. For all others
it returns a I .
This operator is used with the RECORD pseudoop and is the name of the record field. The format
of RECORD is: recordname RECORD fieldname: width. The value of fieldname, when used
in an expression, is the shift count to move the
field to the far right within the byte or word.

App.A
TABLE A.7

IBM Macro Assembler/2

281

SYSTEMS-ORIENTED 80286 AND 80386 INSTRUCTIONS

Instruction

Purpose

Comments

ARPL dest. 1 source

Adjust RPL field of
selector

CLTS

Clear Task Switched
Flag

LAR dest. 1 source

Load access rights byte

LGDT /LIDT M

Load Global/Interrupt
Descriptor Table
register

LLDT source

Load Local Descriptor
Table register

LMSW source

Load Machine Status
Word
Load segment limit

If the RPL field of the selector (protection
bits) in dest. is less than the RPL field
of source, ZF = l and the RDL field of
dest. is set to match source.
The Task Switch Flag is in the Machine
Status Word and is set each time a task
change occurs. This instruction clears that
flag.
Destination contains a selector. If the associated descriptor is visible at the called protection level, the access rights byte of
the descriptor is loaded into the high byte
of source (low byte = 0).
m points to 6 bytes of memory used to provide Descriptor Table values (Global and
Interrupt). This instruction loads these tables into the appropriate 80286 registers.
Source is a selector pointing to the Global
Descriptor Table. The GDT should, in
tum, be a Local Descriptor Table. The
LDT register is then loaded with source.
The Machine Status Word is loaded from
source.
If the Descriptor Table value pointed to by
the selector in destination is visible at
the current protection level, a limit value
specified by source is loaded into this
descriptor.
The Task Register is loaded from source.
The contents of the specified Descriptor Table register are copied to 6 bytes of memory pointed to by m.
The Local Descriptor Table register is stored
in the word register or memory location
specified by destination.
The Machine Status Word is stored in the
word register or memory location specified by destination.
Source is a selector. These instructions determine whether the segment corresponding to this selector is reachable under the
current protection level.
The contents of the Task Register are stored
in destination.

LSL de st. 1 source

LTR source
SGDT /SIOT M

SLOT de st,

Load Task Register
Store Global/Interrupt
Descriptor Table
register
Store Local Descriptor
Table register

SMSW de st,

Store Machine Status
Word

VERR/VERW source

Verify a segment for
reading or writing

STR de st,

Store Task Register

280
TABLE A.6

App.A
ADDITIONAL 80386 APPLICATION INSTRUCTIONS

Instruction

Purpose

BSF dest,, source

Bit scan forward

BSR de st,, source

Bit scan reverse
Bit test

BT base' offset
BTC base, offset

Bit test and complement

BTR base, offset

Bit test and reset

BTS base, offset

Bit test and set

CWDE, CWD

Convert word to doubleword
Compare doublewords
Convert doubleword
to quadword

CMPSD
CDQ

SCASD

Input
Load string operand
Move data from
string to string
Move with signextend
Move with zeroextend
Output
Pop all general registers
Pop stack into
EFLAGS
Push all general registers
Push EFLAGS onto
stack
Compare string data

SETcc de st.

Byte set on condition

SHLD dest. 'Count

Double-precisionshift left
Double-precision
shift right
Store string data

INSD
LODSD
MOVSD
MOVSX
MOVZX
OUT SD
PO PAD
PDP FD
PUSHAD
PUSHFD

SHRD de st. 1 Count
STD SD

IBM Macro Assembler/2

Comments
The source word (doubleword) is scanned for a
set bit and the index value of this bit loaded
in destination. Scanning is from right to left.
Scans as in BSF but reverse order.
This instruction loads the bit value from base
at offset in the base, into the CF register.
This instruction loads the bit value from base
at- offset in the base, into the CF register, and
complements the bit in base.
This instruction loads the bit value from base
at offset in the base, into the CF register, and
resets the bit to 0.
This instruction is identical to BTR, but the resulting bit is set to l .
This instruction converts the signed word in AX
to a doubleword in EAX.
This instruction compares ES : [EDI] with
DS:[ESI].
Converts the signed doubleword in EAX to a
signed 64-bit integer in the register pair
EDX:EAX by extending the sign into EDX.
Input from port DX to ES:[EDI] (doubleword).
Load doubleword DS:[ESI] into EAX.
Move doubleword DS:[ESI] to ES:[EDI].
Move byte to word, byte to dword, and word
to dword with sign extend.
Move byte to word, byte to dword, and word
to dword with 0 extend.
Output dword DS:[ESI] to port in DX.
Pops the eight 32-bit general registers.
Pops the 32-bit stack top into EFLAGS.
Pushes the eight 32-bit general registers onto
the stack.
Pushes the EFLAGS register onto the stack.
Compares dwords EAX and ES:[EDI] and updates. EDI.
Stores a byte (equal to 1), if cc, the condition,
is met (following a compare, for example).
Otherwise, a value of 0 is stored at the destination.
The destination is shifted left by count.
Same as SHLD but shift is to the right.
Store EAX in dword ES: [EDI] and update EDI.

App.A
TABLE A.5

IBM Macro Assembler/2

279

ADDITIONAL 80286 APPLICATION INSTRUCTIONS

Instruction

Purpose

BOUND dest. 1source

Check array index
against bounds

ENTER iMMediate-wo rd 1
iMMediate-bYte

Make stack frame for
procedure parameters

IMUL dest. tiMMediate

Integer immediate
multiply
Input from port to
string

INS/INSB/INSW
dest.-string1Port

LEAVE
OUTS/OUTSB/OUTSW
Port .source-string

High-level procedure
exit
Output string to port

RCL de st, 1CL

Pop all general registers
Push immediate onto
stack
Rotate left through

RCR de st, 1CL

Rotate right through

ROL de st, 1CL

Rotate left

ROR dest. 1CL

Rotate right

SAL/SHL de st, 1CL
SARdest.1CL

Shift arithmetic left/
shift logical left
Shift arithmetic right

SHR dest. 1CL

Shift logical right

POPA
PUSH iMMediate

carry
carry

Comments

This instruction ensures that an index (destination) is above or equal to the first
word in the memory location defined
by source. Similarly, it must be below
or equal to "source + 2."
"Immediate-word" specifies how many
bytes of storage to be allocated on the
stack for the routine being entered. ''Immediate-byte" specifies the nesting
level of the routine within the high-level
source code being entered.
Does a signed multiplication of destination
by an immediate value.
Transfers a byte or word string from the
port numbered by DX to ES: DI. The
operand dest.-string determines the type
of move: byte or word.
Executes a procedure return for a highlevel language.
Transfers a byte or word string from memory at DS : DI to the port numbered by
DX.
Restores the eight general-purpose registers saved on the stack by PUSHA.
This instruction pushes the immediate data
onto the stack.
Same as RCL for 8088 except count can
be 31.
Same as RCR for 8088 except count can
be 31.
Same as ROL for 8088 except count can
be 31.
Same as ROR for 8088 except count can
be 31.
Same as 8088 instructions except count
can be 31.
Same as 8088 instruction except count can
be 31.
Same as 8088 instruction except count can
be 31.

278

App.A

TABLE A.4

THE COMPARE INSTRUCTION GROUP

Instruction

Purpose

CMP destination, source

Compare two
operands

CMPS destination-str
source-st r

Compare byte or
word string

(CMPSB)
(CMPSW)

IBM Macro Assembler/2

Comments

This instruction causes the source to
be subtracted from the destination;
however, only the flags are affected. The destination remains unchanged.
The source string (with DI as an index
for the extra segment) is subtracted
from the destination string (which
uses SI as index). Only the flags
are affected and both DI and SI
are incremented. A typical sequence of instructions could be
MOV SI 1 OFFSET AAA
MOV 011 OFFSET BBB
CMPS AAA 1 BBB

Table A.5 contains additional instructions specific to the 80286 microprocessor. Table A.6 contains similar instructions for the 80386 microprocessor. Both of
these microproce~sors are designed to operate in Protected Mode. The computer used
in writing this book was a PC AT with a 6-MHz throughput rate, as opposed to the
4-MHz clocks associated with the IBM PC. Expansion to the PS/2 systems should
yield even faster performance than the 80286-based system used here. Table A.7
presents the system-oriented instructions available for the 80286 and 80386. These
instructions are not normally accessible by the applications programmer.
Table A.8 contains the Macro Assembler operators available to the programmer, Table A.9 contains the pseudo-operations available to the Macro Assembler
programmer, and Table A.10 contains a set of operators to be used with the macro
pseudo-op.
Table A.11 illustrates the coprocessor instruction set. These instructions begin
with the letter "F" and most rely on the use of the coprocessor stack registers, ST(O)
through ST(7), for implementation. These stack registers serve as the general-purpose
registers for the coprocessor. Usually, ST(O) serves as the source register and ST(l)
as the destination, particularly in implicit instructions such as FADD when used
without operands.

App.A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

TABLE A.3

277

(Concluded)

Instruction

Purpose

JE short-label
(JZ)

Jump if equal/
if zero

JG short-label
(JNLE)

Jump if greater/if
not less or equal

JGE short-label
(JNL)

Jump if greater or
equal/if not less

JL short-label
(JNGE)

Jump if less/if not
greater or equal

JLE short-label
(JNG)

Jump if less or
equal/if not
greater
Jump
Jump if no carry

JMP target
JNC short-label
JNE short-label
(JNZ)
JNO short-label
JNB short-label
(JPO)
JNS short-label

JO short-label
JP short-label
(JPE)
JS short-label

Jump if not equal/
if not zero
Jump if no overflow
Jump if no parity/
if parity odd
Jump if no sign/if
positive
Jump on overflow
Jump on parity/
if parity even
Jump on sign

Comments

If the last operation to change ZF set this
flag (gave a result of 0), JE will cause
a jump to occur. This is a short-label
jump.
If ZF = 0 and SF = OF, the JG instruction
will cause a jump to short-label. This
instruction is used with signed operands.
This instruction is the same as JG except
ZF is not considered. If SF = OF, the
jump occurs. This is a short-label instruction with signed operands.
If SF # OF, the JL instruction will result
in a jump. This instruction is short-label
with signed operands.
IfZF = 1 or SF# OF, the JLE instruction
yields a short-label jump. The instruction
is used with signed operands.
This is a direct and unconditional jump.
If CF = 0, this instruction yields a shortlabel jump.
If ZF = 0, this short-label jump will occur.
IfOF = 0, this short-label jump will occur.
If PF= 0, this short-label jump will occur.
If SF= 0, this short-label jump will occur.
IfOF = 1, this short-label jump will occur.
If PF= l, this short-label jump will occur.
If SF = l , this short-label jump will occur.

276

App.A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

Table A.3 presents the jump instruction group. These instructions are used to
achieve execution control within the langauge. They accomplish this by providing
the capability to change the instruction execution sequence based on the outcome of
various tests. These tests can be performed by various instructions that change the
state of flags in the flags' register. Table A.4 illustrates the compare instructions,
which serve as a basis for accomplishing such testing. These instructions change the
flags without changing the source or destination.
TABLE A.3

JUMP INSTRUCTION GROUP

Purpose

Comments

JA short-label
(JNBE)

Jump if above/
if not below or
equal

JAE short-label
(JNB)

Jump if above or
equal/if not below

JB short-label
(JNAE)
(JC)

Jump if below/if
not above or
equal/if carry

JBE short-label
(JNA)

Jump if below or
equal/if not
above

JCXZ short-label

Jump if ex is zero

This jump is used in conjunction with the
carry and zero flags. If either or both
are set, no jump occurs. Suppose two
operands are compared; then if the destination is greater than the source (above)
CF = ZF = 0 and the jump occurs.
The jump is within -128 to + 127 bytes
(short-label) and unsigned operands are
used.
This jump is similar to JA except only the
carry flag is examined. If a previous compare, for example, is performed and the
destination is greater or equal to the
source (above or equal), CF = 0 and
the jump occurs. This is a short-label
instruction with unsigned operands.
This jump is the opposite of JAE. If the
carry flag is set, the jump will occur.
Suppose a previous compare is performed and the destination is less than
the source (below); CF = 1 and the jump
occurs. This is a short label instruction
with unsigned operands.
This jump is the same as JB except it also
takes place if the zero flag is set (below
or equal). It is short-label with unsigned
operands.
Suppose an instruction sequence causes the
count register (CX) to decrement. When
ex reaches 0, control would transfer to
the short-label after execution of JCXZ.
This is a short-label jump.

Instruction

App.A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

TABLE A.2

275

(Concluded)

Instruction

DAS
110
IN ace, port

OUT port, ace
Miscellaneous
XCHG dest,src
XLAT src-table

Purpose

Comments

Decimal subtract
adjust

Adjust for decimal subtraction.

Input byte/word

The byte/word contents of port are
loaded into AU AX.
The contents of the accumulator are
sent to port output.

Output byte/word

Exchange
Translate

Exchanges the source (src) with dest.
BX is loaded with a table address. AL
contains a location number (byte) in
the table and this byte is replaced
in AL.

family of microprocessors. These instructions are grouped by category:
1. Arithmetic
2. Logical
3. Move
4. Load
5. Loop
6. Stack
7. Count
8. Flags
9. Shift
10. Rotate
11. Store
12. String
13. Convert
14. Control
15. ASCII
16. Decimal
17. I/0
18. Miscellaneous

App.A

274
TABLE A.2

(Continued)

Instruction

RCR dest,cnt
ROL dest,cnt

ROR dest,cnt
Store
STOS dest-str
SAHF
String
REP

REP NE
SCAS dest-str

Convert
CWD

CBW
Control
CALL target
RET

ESC ext-opcode,
src
LOCK
NOP
WAIT
ASCII
AAA

AAD
AAH
AAS

Decimal
DAA

IBM Macro Assembler/2

Purpose

Comments

Rotate right through
carry
Rotate left

Rotates dest right in wrap-around fashion cnt bits where cnt is in CL.
Same as RCL except the high-order
bit rotates into CF as well as the
low-order bit.
Same as ROL except to the right.

Rotate right
Store byte or word
string
Store AH in flags

Transfers a byte (word) from AL (AX)
to the location pointed to by DI.
Transfers the value in AH to the flags
register.

Repeat string operati on

Causes the string operation that
follows to repeat until ex = 0,
ZF = 1.
Same as REP except ZF = 0.

Repeat string operati on
Scan byte or word
string

Subtracts the dest-str from AL (AX)
one byte at a time and affects the
flags.

Convert word to
doubleword
Convert byte to
word

Sign extends AX into DX.

Calls a procedure
Return from a procedure
Escape

Calls a procedure (target).
Returns control to the calling routine.

Lock bus
No operation
Wait

Sign extends AL into AX.

Initiates the ext-opcode with operand
src.
Closes the bus to access.
A do-nothing operation.
A bus cycle state used for synchronization.

ASCII adjust for addi ti on
ASCII adjust for division
ASCII adjust for
multiply
ASCII adjust for
subtraction

Adjusts the sum for an ASCII numerical value following addition.
Adjusts the quotient for ASCII numerical value following division.
Adjusts the product for ASCII numerical value following multiplication.
Adjusts the difference for an ASCII
numerical value following subtraction.

Decimal add adjust

Adjust for decimal addition.

App. A

IBM Macro Assembler/2

TABLE A.2

273

(Continued)

Instruction

LAHF
LDS dest,src
LEA dest,src
LES dest,src

Purpose

Comments

Load AH from flags
Load data segment
register
Load effective address
Load extra segment
register

Transfers the flags to AH.
Loads a 32-bit address into DS and
dest (offset).
Transfers the offset of src to dest.

Loop until count
complete
Loop if equal

Control is transferred to short-label if
ex ~ 0 and ex is decremented.
Same as LOOP but control transfers
if ZF = 1, as an additional requirement.
Same as LOOPE except ZF must equal
0.

Loads a 32-bit address into ES and
dest (offset).

Loop

LOOP short-label
LOOPE short-label

LOOPNE shortlabel

Loop if not equal

Stack

POP dest

Pop word off the
stack
Pop flags off the
stack
Push word onto the
stack
Push flags onto the
stack

Transfers a word from the stack
(pointed to by SP) to dest.
Transfers the word from the stack top
to the flags register.
src is placed on the stack top.

Decrement
Increment

Subtract one from dest.
Add one to dest.

Clear carry flag
Clear direction flag
Clear interrupt flag
Complement carry
flag
Set carry flag
Set direction flag
Sets interrupt flag

Sets Cf= 0.
Sets DF = 0.
Sets IF= 0.
Changes setting of CF.

SAL dest,cnt

Shift arithmetic left

SHL dest,cnt
SAR dest,cnt

Shift logical left
Shift arithmetic
right
Shift logical right

Shifts dest cnt bits left. CL contains
cnt.
Same as SAL.
Same as SAL except shift if to the
right.
Same as SAR.

Rotate left through
carry

Rotates dest left in wrap-around fashion cnt bits where cnt is in CL.

POPF
PUSH src
PUS HF

The flags register is loaded onto the
top of the stack.

Count

DEC dest
INC dest.
Flags

CLC
CLD
CLI
CMC
STC
STD
STI

Sets CF= 1.
Sets DF = 1.
Sets IF= 1.

Shift

SHR dest,cnt
Rotate

RCL dest,cnt

323

Answers To Problems
memory area such as a shared segment defined using
\SHAREMEM\SDAT.DAT

where the path is common to both processes.
3.6. RAM semaphores are a good candidate for intertask communications when each
thread is within the same process. When conducting interprocess communications,
system semaphores provide a good method for synchronization because they share a
common system memory area and can be passed back and forth.
3.7. The macro @pushs loads a 32-bit address for parm on the stack. The macro @pushd
loads the 32-bit contents of the double-word parameter parm onto the stack. The
fourth parameter of@DosWriteQueue must contain a pointer value, and the address
of this the double word containing this value is not of interest.
3.8. By clearing the semaphore using @DosSemClear.
3.9. There could be a segment protection violation, as both processes contend for the
speaker.
3.10. A pipe was used to pass buffered data directly. The queue, on the other hand, was
used to pass pointers to buffers. The queue employed a shared memory area allocated by @DosAllocSeg, whose buffer address was passed via the queue.
3.11. See Table 3.1.
3.12. A shared segment is allocated with @DosAJlocShrSeg and is used when two or more
processes need to access a common buffer in interleaved or multiple asynchronous
fashion. The fact that both have simultaneous access must be regulated using semaphores, for example. A giveable segment, on the other hand, would be used when a
process desires to write to a common segment and then release the segment so that
another process can access the "given" segment.
3.13. Process 1
read_hdl
write_hdl
buf_flag
bytes_written

dw
dw
dw
dw

msize
ssell
shrname

dw
dw
db

@DosAllocShrSeg

msize,shrname,msell

; allocate segment

@DosMakePipe

read_hdl, write_hdl,

buf_flag ;Create pipe

@DosCreateSem

?
?

256

;for example

?
?
?

'\SHAREMEM\SDATl.DAT',0

Synchronize

Answers To Problems

324

@DosWrite write_hdl,message,length,bytes_written

;Transfer

@DosSemSet

; set semaphore

@DosExecPgm
@Dos Wait

;execute child
;wait child completion

Process 2
shrsel dw ?
shrname db '\SHAREMEM\SDATl. DAT, , 0
read_hdl •••
bytes_read •••
@DosOpenSem

•••

; open semaphore

@DosGetShrSeg •••

; get shared segment

; load read handle and message length from shared segment
buffer
@DosRead read_hdl,

buffer,

@DosSemClear

length,

bytes_read

;read buffer

; clear semaphore

3.14. Process 1
q_hdl dw ?
q_name db '\QUEUES\QDAT.DAT' ,O
@DosCreateQueue q_hdl, •••

; create queue

@DosExecPgm •••

; execute child

@DosReadQueue q_hdl, •••

; read queue buffer

;transfer message using 32-bit queue pointer to buffer
@DosFreeSeg •••

; free

allocated segment

@DosCloseQueue •••

; close queue

Process 2
q_hdl
q_name

db

dw ?
'\QUEUES\QDAT.DAT',0

(process)

325

Answers To Problems

q_w
q_v
q_rr

dw 0
dd 0
dw 0

@DosOpenQueue

;open queue

@DosAllocSeg •••

; allocate segment

;load segment with message
@DosGiveSeg •••

;get read selector

@DoswriteQueuel •••

;write address to queue

@DosFreeSeg

q_w

; free

allocated segment

@DosCloseQueue •••

3.15. The intraprocess thread appears as a FAR entry point within the same process segment. An interprocess thread appears as a FAR call to an entry point in a new segment, and it must be started with DosExecPgm.
3.16. The calls
@DosAllocSeg
@DosReAllocSeg

actually create and reallocate global memory space. This memory can exist as virtual addresses (on disk) or as actual data RAM. The call
@DosSubAlloc

subdivides an existing segment into smaller blocks of local memory. This call returns
a block offset to be used as the start of the memory block. No consideration of previous writes to the segment is made; hence a block can overwrite a memory area if
not properly handled. A recommended procedure is to suballocate the memory segment as early as possible, thereby obtaining a block offset from which to work.

Chapter 4
4.1. When IBM and Microsoft developed the two versions of the Toolkit, they modified
the structures and calling sequences between them. Calling the physical screen buffer
in Version 1.0 required a structure PhysBufData. In the Version 1.1 this structure
was renamed _ VIOPHYSBUF and the structure members have different tags between
versions. Hence many of the Version 1.1 Toolkit entities require slightly different nomenclature than that of Version 1.0.
4.2. Many of the Standard C 1/0 library functions have been defined under Microsoft C
Optimizing Compiler Version 5.1 to run as reentrant routines. Hence these library
routines are callable in the usual fashion from Protected Mode.

Answers To Problems

326

4.3. All formal parameters specified as type int need not be type specified in the formal
parameter list. Hence, when passing parameters, only types other than int need be
specified.
4.4. The input value x is of int type, hence can be signed. The range of such signed
variables is [-32,768, 32,768]. Had this parameter been of type double or float, a
much greater range of values would be permissible.
4.5. The normal C local stack calling convention starts with the Nth parameter and continues to load the stack down to parameter 1. The API services require co.nventional
loading from parameter 1 to N. In the Toolkit a type APIENTRY is defined using
the pascal convention, which reorders the formal parameters on the stack from 1 to

N.
4.6. The code
CHAR FAR *ptr;

defines a FAR pointer, ptr, which points to a byte value using a 32-bit address. The
code
CHAR FAR

*shrname =

"\\SHAREMEM\\SDATl.DAT";

defines a FAR pointer, shrname, which points to a string value using a 32-bit address and associates the string value with this 32-bit address.
4.7. This function generates a full 32-bit address for a FAR call. The variables sel and
off correspond to selector and offset, respectively, and must be obtained separately.
4.8. This declaration associates a FAR pointer address of OxB8000 with a BYTE value
specified as the structure element PVBPrt2.pBuf. Note that this structure element is
specified as part of the physical buffer structure_VIOPHYSBUF. The value in question is the start address (32-bit) for the physical screen buffer.
4.9. The return from sin() is double precision; hence the defining relation should be
y

=

(float)(sin(2.

*PI*

t))l

4.10. The dot attribute for wdot() is 1, and the dot attribute for uwdot() is 0.
4.11. The column values represent horizontal increments, and the row values represent vertical increments.
4.12. This is the character code for putting the Epson dot matrix printer (FX-85) into
graphics mode. The values OxlB and Ox4V specify
ESC

k

and 64 is the difference between 256 and 320. Here the "1" indicates one block of
256 columns plus "64," to get 320 columns in the printer graphics mode. The ESC k
indicates that the printer must go to graphics mode.
4.13. This sends the Epson FX-85 printer the command
ESC

A 8

327

Answers To Problems

which changes the printer output to case sn2-inch spacing for lines. This removes
any extra vertical spacing that might appear in the output and ensures that the eight
dots of vertical spacing will butt together as each vertical set of pins is executed for
each line (25 vertical lines of eight pins per line).
4.14. RAM semaphores.
4.15. The calls all employ type definitions for the formal parameters unless the parameters
are of basic integer type (such as INT, UINT, USHORT, SHOR'I).
4.16. One process must establish the semaphore, open the second process, and wait until
the second process is complete. The second process maintains synchronization by
executing with the first process blocked until
DosSemClear()

is issued by the second process. This allows the first process to cease being blocked
by
DosSemWait()

and continue execution beyond this instruction. Threads are handled in identical fashion.
4.17. To pass the pipe read handle, read_hdl, to the second process, where it is used to
locate the pipe buffer and transfer the pipe message using
DosRead()

4.18. The thread's stack is separate from the calling thread's stack. Hence the compiler
will detect an overflow condition because the second thread's stack is "outside" the
stack originally defined for the overall process. To avoid compiler errors with the
Microsoft C Optimizing Compiler Version 5.1, for example, a compiler option of -Gs
must be used.
4.19. The programs have been debugged and it is assumed that no error checking is
needed intrinsically. Good form would retain such error checking when dynamic errors can creep in. For clarity, we have avoided them in the code dynamics.
4.20. The points
(x,y,z)

= (1, 0, 0)
(0, 1, 0)
(0, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 1)

4.21. From the library cgraph.lib.

Chapter 5
5.1. Load the routine as a run-time dynamic linker library (DLL).
5.2. The dynamic link library (.dll) executable module is generated from a group of object modules as
link

(group object modules),
( .dll module),, (libraries), (.def module)

Answers To Problems

328

Here the definition file must start with the LIBRARY keyword. Next, the .lib file is
created from
imp lib ( • lib file)

( • def module)

This definition file is the same one used earlier to define the .dll module.
5.3. The return address offset.
5.4. It appears in the definition file with LIBRARY, not NAME.
5.5. EXPORTS are the names of routines contained in a DLL which will be available to
be called by other modules. IMPORTS are the names of external routines to be used
by the DLL.
5.6. The two services needed are
DosLoadModule
DosGetProcAddr

The first is required to load the run-time .dll file, which must be specified in the initial calling program. This is the calling program's link with the DLL. The second is
needed to specify the DLL procedure entry point so that a simple FAR call to this
entry point can be made.
5.7. You would choose a flowchart because it illustrates the dynamic decision-oriented
performance of the program. There are several types of flowcharts: literal and functional. The former spell out each individual programming step and tend to be very
detailed. Functional flowcharts are more desirable and address program activity in a
functional sense; that is, each block constitutes a major activity in the sequence of
program flow, and this activity usually consists of many program steps. A Structure
Chart merely illustrates the subordinate relationships among the program components.
This device is most useful for providing the user with an overview of the program
and a general picture of the major modules appearing in the program.
5.8. The dominant characteristic of a C function is a single entry and exit point and a
single return value. These features serve to make the program structure very orderly
with a downward flow of activity to the code instead of the varied branching found
in programs typified by FORTRAN code, for example. In FORTRAN programs, the
unrestricted use of GOTOs and conditional branching frequently makes following the
program flow difficult.
5.9. C programs can efficiently use global variables when large array components of databases are to be manipulated. In this case the use of arrays as local variables would
greatly expand the stack area and result in inefficient memory allocation. The difficulty with using global variables in any implementation is that external modules that
call such variables frequently lose track of the time history of the variables. By treating variables as locally defined, the complete time picture of the performance of the
variable is available in the accessing module.
5.10. This is accessible only through the Presentation Manager, which did not become
available until OS/2 Version 1.1 was issued.
5.11. Three-dimensionally the x-axis points out of the image away from the plane of the
CRT. Hence a two-dimensional display, such as a CRT, can only illustrate the image

329

Answers To Problems

of a three-dimensional surface as it is projected onto such a two-dimensional display.
This projection is achieved by setting one of the coordinate sets equal to zero.
5.12. Some of the hidden facets appearing in the three-dimensional surface of Figures 5.19
through 5.23 actually have positive direction normals to the facet surface. Hence
these surfaces, even though hidden, will not satisfy the criterion that the normal
points into the plane of the CRT.
5.13. This equation has the form
• 2

lim A2 sm u

-;;p:-

U-+0

using

sin u

u3

=u

u5

3! + 5!

This becomes

J~oA2 [ 1 - 3! + 5!y/
g2

-

... ]2= A2

5.14. This routine must be called before setting the CGA mode because it prints a request
to the text screen (asking for the name of the data file).
5.15. The selector, MMI, would no longer be referenced.

Index

@define, 42
@pushs, 42
@pushw, 42
@DosAllocHuge, 121
@DosAllocSeg, 96
@DosAllocShrSeg, 105
@DosBeep, 132
@DosClose, 46
@DosCloseQueue, 158
@DosCreateQueue, 157
@DosCreateSem, 130
@DosCreateThread, 132
@DosExecPgm, 105
@DosExit, 46
@DosFreeSeg, 96, 112
@DosGetHugeShift, 123
@DosGetSeg, 116
@DosGetShrSeg, 105
@DosGiveSeg, 116
@D,osl5111Process, 106
@QosMakePipe, 152
@DosOpen, 46
@DosOpenSem, 130
@DosRead, 156
@DosReadQue~~· 159

@DosReallocSeg, 116
@DosSemClear, 130
@DosSemSet, 130
@DosSemWait, 130
@DosSubSet, 126
@DosWrite, 46
@DosWriteQueuel, 160
@VioGetPhysBuf, 56
@VioScrLock, 56
@VioScrollUp, 54
@VioScrUnlock, 56
@VioSetMode, 56
@VioWrtTTY, 132
@kbdStringln, 56

A
accessing huge segments, 119
accessing a memory segment, 112
accessing a shared segment, 105
access rights byte, 10
algorithm development, 248
align-type, 44
331

Index

332
API.LIB, 40
APIENTRY, 176
API Services, 20
API type definitions, 176
Apple Mcintosh display, 17
Application Programming Interface, 2
assembler addressing modes, 271
assembler to C template, 222
assembler instructions, 272
assembler macro operators, 282
assembler pseudo-ops, 284
ASSUME pseudo-op, 44
asynchronous execution, 29
automatic segments, 229

B
base pointer, 176
bbox.asm, 82
bboxl.asm, 82
BIOS, 19
bitmap, 32
bitwise operators, 248
boot record, 17
boxprtl.asm, 69
branching in C, 245
bus, 5

c
Cartesian unit vector, 253
C compiler, 167
C control mechanisms, 243
cdecl, 33
CGA graphics mode, 54
cgraph.lib, 183
changing segment size, 115
child process, 30
child process in C, 192
ckthread.c, 199
C language syntax, 293
class, 44
clipboard, 32
CODE, 228
code segment privilege, 95
CodeView, 2
Color Graphics Adapter, 51

combine-type, 44
Common Programming Interface, 31
complexity metrics, 241
connecting dot graphics lines, 74
CONNL2, 74
C operators, 296
coprocessor instructions, 288
core loop, 16
C parameter passing, 224
C program to generate threads, 199
C program structure, 171
creating a DLL, 231
creating huge segments, 119
creating a memory segment, 96
creating a pointer, 182
creating a process, 140
creating a shared segment, 105
creating a thread, 130
C screen graphics routines, 182
CSEG, 63
current protection level, 18
cursor, 17

D
DATAl, 223
data management, 14
data structures, 248
db pseudo-op, 45
definition library file, 29
DESCRIPTION, 228
descriptor cache register, 94
descriptor privilege, 95
descriptor table, 10
destruction of a memory segment, 95
device drivers, 14
direct memory access, 53
disk access, 204
dja.c, 214
dlinkl.asm, 233
DOS, 1
DosAllocShrSeg(), 192
doscalls.inc, 41
DOS Compatability Mode, 1
DosExecPgm(), 197
DosExit(), 197

DosKillProcess(), 197
DosMakePipe(), 192

333

Index

DOS partition, 6
DosRead(), 197
DosWrite(), 195
Dow Jones program, 214
dw pseudo-op, 45
dynamic linking, 29
dynamic-link libraries, 29
dynl.asm, 232
dynll.def, 231
dynll. dll, 231
dynll. lib, 231
dyn2.asm, 237
dyn22.def, 236
dyn22.lib, 237
dyn33.def, 237
dyn33.lib, 237

E
Enhanced Graphics Adapter, 51
erasable programmable read only
memory, 6
error checking, 250
EXECUTEONLY, 228
EXECUTEREAD, 228
Explicit Load and Call DLL, 227
EXPORTS, 229
Extended Edition, 2

gen3d.c, 255
giveable segment, 160
global descriptor table, 18
global space, 9
gphrout.c, 182
GRAPHICS.COM, 62
GRAPHLIB.LIB, 72
GROUP pseudo-op, 45
guidelines on C module
development, 240

H
handles, 17
heap, 227
HEAPSIZE, 229
hidden lines, 253
higher-level language, 19
hugeseg.asm, 122
huge segments, 29

facet, 252
facet3d.c, 262
Family.API, 35
Far call, 43
firmwave, 6
flagword, 12
form, 246
fprintf(), 218
Full-screen command prompt mode, 2
function macros, 300

IBM PS/2, 1
icon, 31
IFl pseudo-op, 45
implib, 231
import library utility, 231
IMPORTS, 230
include files, 168
INDEX field, 10
initialization routine dyninit.obj, 236
Intel CPU, 1
interfacing assembler to C, 221
interrup address space, 9
Interrupt Service Routine, 14
intersegment transfer, 11
IOPL, 18
IOPS, 30
iterative loops, 242

G

K

gates, 11

keyboard services, 313

F

Index

334

L
latch, 6
ldarray, 63
ldmem, 112
levels of protection, 3
LIBRARY, 228
linear subspaces, 8
lineh, 61
linker, 28
LINK utility, 231
loader, 28
LOADONCALL, 228
Load on Call DLL, 227
local thread stack, 16
LS138 demultiplexers, 6
LS245 transcriber, 6

NONSHARED, 228
nos2512.asm, 106
nos261.asm, 111

0
object-oriented tools, 251
optimizing execution speed, 222
option/CO, 198
option-Gs, 198
option-Zi, 198
OS2P2.EXE, 149
overlapped windows, 32

p
M
machine code, 44
Machine Status Word, 12
macro assembler, 43
MAKE file, 173
MAKEP function, 180
Memory Management, 93
memory-management registers, 8
message boxes, 32
metafile, 32
Microsoft C Compiler Version 5.1, 2
Microsoft Windows, 17
mixed-language programming, 222
Mixed Object Document Content
Architecture, 32
modal dialog boxes, 32
modaless dialog boxes, 32
Modular Code, 87
module size, 241
mouse, 17
mouse services, 313
multitasking, 29
multi-threaded applications, 188
musical scale program, 225

N
NAME, 228
NEAR procedure, 173

PAGE pseudo-op, 45
pascal calling convention, 176
pel, 51
physical address, 4
physical memory space, 6
physical selector, 61
pipes, 14
pipes in C, 192
pipest.asm, 152
pixel, 51
polling model, 14
pprtscr.c, 182
preemptive time-slicing dispatcher, 14
PRELOAD, 228
pre-loaded DLL, 227
Presentation Manager, 17
printer control characters, 48
printer graphics mode, 51
printer program, 46
printf, 172
print head weights, 48
privileged instruction exception, 18
process, 14
processor extension, 12
program design language, 244
program page numbers, 310
program to plot two lines, 56
program segment prefix, 48
Protected Mode features, 20
PROTMODE, 228
prtscr, 61
prtwave.c, 182

Index

pseudo-code, 87
pseudo-op, 44

Q
QUEUECL.EXE, 157
queues, 14

R
random access memory, 2
random box program, 136
reentrant, 29
registers, 4
representation of tetrahedron, 201
requested privilege level, 10
return values, 250
rotating tetrahedron, 200
rotation matrices, 201
rotation of a point, 200
rotetra.c, 205
RS-233C adapter, 5
run-time loading, 28

s
scalesl.asm, 226
scanf, 172
screen buffer, 42
screen buffer physical memory, 51
screen buffer pixel placement, 51
scr Id, 61
scr-ldm, 96
segment address translation registers, 10
segment descriptors, 10
segment selector, 9
segmented memory, 8
SEGMENTS, 228
semaphore, 14
semaphores in C, 192
sequentially defined code, 243
SHARED, 228
shared memory segments, 14
shared segments in C, 192
SHAREMEM, 105
simplified OS/2 architecture, 15

335
sine work program, 180
single-thread, 1
slopeln.asm, 74
stack, 19
stack pointer, 176
STACKSIZE, 228
Standard Edition 1.0, 1
Standard Edition 1.1, 2
Standard Mode (80x25), 54
stdio.h, 171
strategy routine, 14
Structure Chart, 34
Structured Programming, 87
Structured Query Language, 2
STUB, 228
style, 244
suballocating memory, 125
subcalls.inc, 41
swave.c, 180
synchronous execution, 30
sysmac.inc, 41
Systems Application Architecture, 31

T
table indicator, 10
task manager, 14
task state segments, 11
task switch, 18
temporary screen buffer, 104
termination panel, 32
tetra.c, 201
_TEXT, 223
thread, 14
three dimensional surface, 251
tiled windows, 32
timhist.c, 213
TITLE pseudo-op, 45
Toolkit, 30
Top-Down Design, 87
twoln.asm, 69
twolnm.asm, 96

v
VEDIT PLUS, 2
Video Graphics Adapter, 51
VioGetCurPos, 41

336
VIOMODEINFO structure, 177
VioScrollUp(), 197
VioWrtITY(), 197
virtual memory, 9

w
waitf, 60
wdot, 56
Windows Software Development Kit, 31

x
xadiskr.c, 260
xscale.c, 261

z
zero termination, 105

Index

Answers To Problems
2.7 .•••
kbd_buf
lkbd_buf
iowait
kbdhdl
freq
dur
@KbdStringin
@Dos Beep

321

db
dw
dw
equ
dw
dw

80
$-kbd_buf
0
0
1000
5000

kbd_buf,lkbd_buf,iowait,kbdhdl
freq,dur

2.8. Yes, all calls to the API can be made in full form, where each push and pop, as
well as EXTRN declaration, is stated explicitly according to the rules of OS/2. The
toolkit simply provided a set of assembler .inc files and C .h files that facilitated
usage of the API services through very functional macros.
2.9. The key assumption is that segment selectors can be treated as segment addresses.
Since the 80286 accesses segments using the selectors, the selector value must reside
in a segment register. The address is then calculated in the usual Protected Mode
fashion, where the segment selector acts as a segment address. The use of segment
override addressing, such as
es: [bp]

simply permits specification of an address in the usual fashion, where the segment
selector is made to correspond to the physical segment address when VioGetPhysBuf
is exercised.
2.10. They represent FAR locations because the entry points are called from external API
modules, hence a 32-bit address must be specified.
2.11. No hierarchy should have a single child subordinate to a parent. The box 310 should
be absorbed in 300.
2.12. The command is
@Doswrite dev_hand,in_buffer5,bytesin3,bytesout

where the undefined parameter is
in_buffer5 db 1BH,41H,OCH

2.13. It is intuitive that they cannot be preempted by an OS/2 task switch, or the possibility of losing data from the device would occur.
2.14. To access the screen buffer (physical) properly, the screen must be locked; hence if
scr_ld is to load scr_buffer with the screen context, it must be locked. If prtscr is
executed when the screen is locked, it could dominate access time for the physical
display buffer. Hence the program should load a temporary buffer, release the screen
context, and then begin the print operation.
2.15. Ten complete raster segments.
2.16. The DosExitCritSec corresponds to exit of a critical section of execution for a thread
and returns control to a process. This could be used, for example, when an inde-

322

Answers To Problems
pendent thread has a particular piece of code that must execute prior to any other
operation for the parent process. Then it would be desirable to monitor and ensure
that this code executed, before continuing. Clearly, this could be dynamic and change
with the active chronology of execution.

2.17. DosExit is used to terminate an application and return to OS/2. All other returns
NEAR or F.

Chapter 3
3.1. The drivers mentioned operate from the kernel, level 0. They must originate here
because they have to be protected ahead of all other code. We cannot have a diskwrite preempted in the middle, nor can we tolerate "jerky" mouse cursor movement
as the mouse po5ition changes.
3.2. The macro calls admittedly remove a layer of detail from the program code. This
layer would tend to expand the code by a factor of 4 to 7. All the pushes to the
stack have been suppressed prior to each API call and the call takes on the form of
a higher-level-language (HLL) function call. The data area tends to expand considerably with all the macro parameter definitions, but the actual executable code remains compact. This requires the programmer to develop a general familiarity with
the macro calls at the level of the IBM Programmer's Toolkit or Appendix C of this
book. Once this familiarity has developed it is a very easy matter to read the resulting "structured" code and follow the flow of execution. Hence maintenance becomes
an easy task. Clarity (of bow the code executes) is also paramount, and much more
so under the macro call format. The macro calls do, however, inht"bit debugging in
that the in-line code is missing. If the user prints a copy of the list file with macros
expanded, tracing the source code is still an easy matter. In general, these approaches
tend to be a matter of preference based on the programmer's orientation. We favor
the HlL appearance of the code. It makes functional performance of the code the
primary mechanism to be emphasized. Expansion of the in-line code makes it more
obscure from a functional viewpoint but easier (and essential) to debug.
3.3. For the segment to be sharable, bit 0, to be sharable through @DosGiveSeg, or bit 1,
to be sharable through @DosGetSeg, must be set in the flags word (the third parameter in the calling list). Bit 2 of this same flags word must be set if the segment
is to be discardable.
3.4. The write to the huge segment must use the proper selector. When crossing the 64Kbyte boundary the program must access a new but contiguous selector.

3.S. There must be some common link between the two processes. Usually, this is a
common element name s~h as
\SEM\SDAT.DAT

or
\QUEUES\QDAT.DAT

which appears in both processes and is the same. The system then provides the connection. Alternative to this is the passing of a selector or printer in a common

